(1) 
POSTGRADUATE PROGRAMMES 
Procedures and Requirements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 
Approved in Senate (2015-16/1st) meeting on September 02, 2015 & 
  afterward updates in various Senate meetings approval (upto July 18, 2025) 
 
 
Website: https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/pg-manual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1. 
Postgraduate Programmes 
 
1.2. 
Waiver of Requirements in Special Cases 
 
2. 
ADMISSION 
 
2.1. 
Academic Session 
 
2.2. 
Admission Calendar 
 
2.3. 
Eligibility for Admission and Reservation of Seats 
 
 
2.3.1. 
D.IIT. 
 
 
2.3.2. 
M.Tech. 
 
 
2.3.3 
MS by Research 
 
 
2.3.4. 
M.Des. 
 
 
2.3.5. 
M.B.A. 
 
 
2.3.6. 
Ph.D. in Engineering and IDPs with M.Tech. program 
 
 
2.3.7. 
Ph.D. in Sciences (includes Departments of BSBE, SEE, SPASE) 
 
 
2.3.8. 
Ph.D. in Humanities and Social Sciences 
 
 
2.3.9. 
Ph.D. in Management 
 
 
2.3.10 Ph.D. in Design  
                       2.3.11    Ph.D. in Cognitive Science 
                       2.3.12    MSc and MSPD programme 
 
2.4. 
Admission Procedure 
 
2.5. 
Admission of Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) and Defence Personnel 
 
2.6. 
Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals 
 
2.7. 
Admission to External Registration Programme for M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by 
Research and Ph.D. (Engg. and Earth Sciences) 
 
2.8. 
Admission of Sponsored Candidates 
 
2.9. 
Admission to Part Time Programmes 
 
2.10. Admission of Non-Degree Students 
 
2.11. Admission as Full-time Students for candidates with Employment 
 
3. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 
 
 
4. REGISTRATION 
 
4.1. 
Late Registration 
 
4.2. 
Academic Advising 
 
4.3. 
Semester Load Requirements 
 
4.4. 
Summer Term Registration 
 
4.5. 
Adding/Dropping of Courses and Withdrawing from Courses 
 
4.6. 
Change of Registration from M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/MSc/MBA 
Programme to Ph.D. Programme 
 
4.7. 
Change of Registration from Part-Time to Full-Time Programme 
 
4.8. 
Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time in M.Tech./ MS (By 
Research)/ M.Des./ Ph.D. Programmes 
 
 
5. 
LEAVE RULES 
 
5.1. 
Personal Leave and Casual Leave 
 
5.2. 
Medical Leave 
 
5.3. 
Maternity Leave/Paternity leave 
 
5.4. 
Semester Leave/Term Leave 
 
5.5. 
Medical Certificate 
 
5.6. 
Absence for less than a semester/term 
 
5.7. 
Absence without Sanctioned Leave 
 
(3) 
 
6. PERMISSION TO PROCEED FOR ACADEMIC WORK OUTSIDE IITK 
 
 
6.1. 
Permission to proceed to other academic institutions as non-degree students. 
 
6.2. 
Permission to proceed for academic activities 
 
 
 
7. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS 
 
 
7.1. 
Minimum Duration, Maximum Duration and Academic Requirements 
 
7.2. 
Extension of Programme 
 
7.3. 
Audit courses 
 
7.4. 
Advance Standing at IITK 
 
7.5. 
Residence Outside IITK 
 
7.6. 
Credits, Grades, Semester and Cumulative Performance Index 
 
7.7 
Academic Performance Requirement 
 
7.8 
Exit from Ph.D. Programme 
            7.9 
Transfer from M.Tech./ M.Des. to M.Tech./ M.Des. (with project) 
 
7.10 Withdrawal from Programme 
 
 
8. COMPREHENSIVE EXAMINATION OF PhD STUDENT 
 
 
9. CANDIDACY FOR THE Ph.D. DEGREE 
 
 
10.  STATE OF ART SEMINAR 
 
 
11.  THESIS AND THESIS EXAMINATION 
 
 
 
 11.1. Appointment of Thesis Supervisors of D.IIT., M.Tech. MS by Research, M.Des 
and Ph.D. Students 
             11.2   Doctoral Monitoring Committee (DMC). 
 
 
 11.3. Open Seminar of Ph.D. Students 
 
 
 11.4. Constitution of Committee/Board for Thesis and Oral Examination 
 
 
           11.4.1 M.Tech./M.Des./ MS by Research and D.IIT. Project Oral Examination 
Committee 
 
 
           11.4.2. Ph.D. Thesis Board 
 
 
           11.4.3. Ph.D. Oral Board 
 
 
 11.5. Submission of Thesis/Project 
 
 
  
11.5.1. M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research Thesis/D.IIT. Project 
 
 
  
11.5.2. Ph.D. Thesis 
 
 
11.6. Processing of Project/Thesis 
 
 
  
11.6.1. M.Tech./M.Des./ M.S. by Research/D.IIT. Oral Examination 
 
 
  
11.6.2. Ph.D. Thesis Evaluation by the Thesis Board 
 
 
  
11.6.3. Ph.D. Oral Examination 
           11.7    Award of M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. (by Research)/M.B.A. degree with Ph.D. degree 
 
 
12. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
 
ANNEXURE I: POSTGRADUATE COMMITTEES 
 
ANNEXURE II: RESERVATION OF STATES 
 
 
Annexure II.1 Form of Caste Certificate for SC/ST 
 
 
Annexure II.2 Form of Certificate to be produced by Other Backward Classes 
(NCL) 
 
ANNEXURE III: POSTGRADUATE COURSES 
            ANNEXURE IV: Credit requirement for award of M.Tech/M.Des/MSR/MBA degree 
with PhD. 
            ANNEXURE V: Guidelines for MBA programme in various PG Manual clause 
(4) 
a) 
Conversion from MBA to PhD 
b) Conversion from PhD to MBA (as an exit option) 
c) 
Provision for direct PhD students earning MBA with the extra 
course work 
          ANNEXURE VI: MSPD programme: Change in registration, Academic roadmap   
          ANNEXURE VII: Course Template for MSc and MSPD Programme 
          ANNEXURE VIII: Doctoral Monitoring Committee Report 
(5) 
1.    INTRODUCTION
 
The goals of the postgraduate programmes at the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur are: The 
development of scientific and engineering manpower of the highest quality, to cater to the needs of 
industry, R & D organizations and educational institutions, a broad grasp of the fundamental principles 
of the sciences and scientific methods, a deep understanding of the area of specialization, an innovative 
ability to solve new problems, and a capacity to learn continually and interact with multidisciplinary 
groups. Above all, the students should have a capacity for free and objective enquiry, courage and 
integrity, awareness and sensitivity to the needs and aspirations of society. With these goals in view, the 
postgraduate programmes are designed to include courses of study, seminars and project/thesis through 
which a student may develop his/her concepts and intellectual skills.  
The procedures and requirements stated in this manual embody the philosophy of the postgraduate 
education and ensure a high standard of performance at the Institute. Within this general framework, 
subject to the approval of the Senate Postgraduate Committee (SPGC), the various departments and 
programmes may impose such additional requirements as will serve their particular academic goals. The 
department and programme-wise templates for the various postgraduate (PG) programs with the 
necessary additional requirements like compulsory courses/seminars etc. as approved by the SPGC is 
available with the department (Please refer to department website for information). 
1.1. Postgraduate Programmes  
The Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur offers following programmes:  
1.1.1. Programme leading to the Diploma of the Institute (D.IIT.) in certain specified areas of 
engineering (currently only in Geodesy, Navigation and Mapping, Remote Sensing and GIS; all under 
the Geoinformatics specialization jointly managed by Civil Engineering and Center for Geodesy).  
1.1.2. Programmes leading to the Master of Technology (M.Tech.) degree in Aerospace Engineering, 
Unmanned Aerial Systems , Artificial Intelligence for Sustainability (under the Kotak School of 
Sustainability ),Biological Sciences and Bio-Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Chemical 
Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science and Engineering, Cybersecurity, Earth Sciences, 
Electrical Engineering, Materials Science and Engineering, Materials Science, Mechanical Engineering, 
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, Photonics Science and Engineering, Sustainable Energy 
Engineering, and Space, Planetary & Astronomical Sciences & Engineering (formerly known as “Space 
Science and Astronomy”), Management Sciences (formerly known as “Industrial and Management 
Engineering”). 
1.1.3. Programme leading to the Master of Design (M.Des.) degree. 
1.1.4. Programme leading to the Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree. 
1.1.5. Programmes leading to the Master of Science (M.S.) by Research degree in Aerospace 
Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Science & Engineering, Cognitive 
Science, Cybersecurity, Electrical Engineering, Environmental Engineering and Management, 
Mechanical Engineering, Photonics Science and Engineering, Sustainable Energy Engineering. 
1.1.6. Programmes leading to the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree in Aerospace Engineering (AE), 
Biological Sciences and Bio-Engineering (BSBE), Chemistry (CHM), Chemical Engineering (CHE), 
Civil Engineering (CE), Cognitive Science (CGS), Computer Science and Engineering (CSE), Design 
(6) 
(DES), Earth Sciences (ES), Economic Sciences (ECO), Electrical Engineering (EE), Humanities and 
Social Sciences (HSS) (English, Fine Arts, Philosophy, Psychology and Sociology), Intelligent Systems 
Management Sciences (formerly known as “Industrial and Management Engineering”), Materials 
Science and Engineering (MSE), Materials Science (MSP), Mathematics (MTH) (including Statistics), 
Mechanical Engineering (ME), Nuclear Engineering and Technology (NET), Photonics Science and 
Engineering (PSE), Physics (PHY), Sustainable Energy Engineering (SEE), and Space, Planetary & 
Astronomical Sciences & Engineering (SPASE) (formerly known as “Space Science and Astronomy”). 
The Senate Postgraduate Committee (SPGC), established according to the bylaws of the Senate, 
operates through the Departmental Postgraduate Committees (DPGCs) to administer all aspects of the 
above programmes. The constitution, jurisdiction and functions of the SPGC and the DPGC are given in 
Annexure I.  
1.1.7. Programmes leading to the Master of Science 2-Year (MSc) in Chemistry, Mathematics, Physics, 
Statistics, Economics. 
1.1.8. Programmes leading to the Master of Science-Doctor of Philosophy (Dual Degree) (to be referred 
to as MSPD). 
1.2. Waiver of Requirements in Special Cases  
The procedures and requirements stated in this manual, other than those in Section 2.3 (Eligibility for 
Admissions) and Section 7.7 (Academic Performance Requirement) may be waived in special 
circumstances by the SPGC on the recommendation of the DPGC. All such exceptions shall be reported 
to the Senate.  
2.   ADMISSION 
2.1. Academic Session  
The academic session of the Institute is divided into three parts: two regular semesters and a summer 
term. The first semester will normally commence in the last week of July every year, and the second in 
the first week of January. The summer term will run from the middle of May to the middle of July.  
2.2. Admission Calendar  
2.2.1. The admissions to the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research and Ph.D. programmes may be made in 
either or both of the two regular semesters. Admission to the D.IIT. programme may be made once in a 
year but in either semester. The Head of the Department concerned may take the decision in this regard. 
Admissions to MBA / MSc / MSPD programme are made once a year in the first semester. 
2.2.2. Admissions to the M.Tech./M.Des. /M.S. by Research and Ph.D. programmes are normally made 
in April-May for the first semester and in November-December for the second semester. Admissions to 
the MBA program are normally made in March-April. The Dean of Academic Affairs will notify the 
admission calendar each semester.  
2.2.3. In addition, the department may process applications for admission to M.S. by Research and Ph.D. 
Programmes on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure. The candidates 
admitted during the course of a semester, would be required to register for thesis with proportionate 
reduction in credits. 
 
(7) 
2.3. Eligibility for Admission and Reservation of Seats 
2.3.a. The eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. Departments may prescribe any 
requirements over and above these, subject to the approval of the SPGC. These extra requirements 
should clearly be reflected in the advertisement brochure for admission which is prepared before the 
commencement of the admission calendar each year.  
2.3.b. The “specified minimum” marks/CPI (Cumulative Performance Index), referred to in subsequent 
sections, implies a minimum of 55 percent marks /5.5 (on a 10 point scale) as long as it is not less than 
the minimum pass marks/CPI; otherwise, the “specified minimum” marks/CPI implies the minimum 
pass marks/CPI. 
2.3.c. Applicants having qualifications equivalent to the ones stated in Sections 2.3.1 to 2.3.10 may also 
apply for admission to the appropriate programme. For this purpose, the membership certificates of 
professional societies (like AMIE/AESI) shall not be considered equivalent to bachelor's degree in 
engineering. In addition, online/ distance education program/ degree with no lab component shall not be 
considered equivalent to BTech/ BSc / MSc degree. 
2.3.d. The number of admissions that can be made to any programme shall be as decided by the Senate 
from time to time. 
2.3.e. Reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be as prescribed by the Board of 
Governors. Annexure II provides the details of the reservations approved by the Board. 
2.3.f. Candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes who have passed the basic 
qualifying degree as stated in Sections 2.3.1 to 2.3.10, are eligible to apply irrespective of the marks/CPI 
and will be considered for admission.  
2.3.1. D.IIT. 
The applicant must have a bachelor's degree in engineering or a 4-year bachelor's degree in science or a 
master's degree in science with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. Only candidates sponsored 
by recognized industries are eligible for admission to this programme. 
2.3.2. M.Tech. 
The applicant must have a bachelor's degree in engineering or a 4-year bachelor's degree in science or a 
master's degree in science with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. For admission into 
M.Tech. in Biological Sciences and Bio-engineering, applicants having bachelor’s degree in 
pharmacy/medicine/veterinary science with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum may also be 
considered.  
2.3.3 M.S. by Research 
 
The applicant must have a bachelor's degree in engineering or a 4-year bachelor's degree in science or a 
master's degree in science with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum (please refer to 2.3.b) for 
admission into M.S. by Research.  For admission into M.S. by Research in Cognitive Science, applicants 
having bachelor’s degree in medicine (MBBS) or master’s degree in Psychology/Linguistics/ 
Philosophy/ Anthropology/ Physics/ Chemistry/Mathematics/ Statistics/ Biosciences/ Computer Science/ 
related disciplines with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum (please refer to 2.3.b) may also be 
considered.  
 
Applicants with B.Sc. (3-year) or equivalent with a minimum of 75% marks/7.5 CPI may also be 
considered for admission into M.S. by Research in Computer Science & Engineering, Photonics Science 
and Engineering, and Cognitive Sciences. For admission into M.S. by Research  in Cognitive Science, 
bachelor’s 
degree 
in 
Psychology/Linguistics/ 
Philosophy/ 
Anthropology/ 
Physics/ 
(8) 
Chemistry/Mathematics/ Statistics/ Biosciences/ Computer Science/ related disciplines with a minimum 
of 75% marks/7.5 CPI may also be considered. Students with this qualification have a higher credit 
requirement for graduation (please refer to 7.1 for more details).  
 
2.3.4. M.Des. 
The applicant must have a bachelor's degree in engineering or a 4-year bachelor's degree in science / 
Design (B.Des.) / Architecture (B.Arch) / Planning (B.Plan) / Pharmacy (B.Pharm) / Fine Arts (BFA) / 
Visual Arts (BVA) with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. or Master's degree in science or 
arts with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum 
2.3.5. M.B.A. 
The applicant must have a Bachelor's degree in any discipline with minimum 60 percent marks/6.0 CPl. 
Candidates with Mathematics as a subject at 10+2 or equivalent level.  
2.3.6. Ph.D. in Engineering and IDPs with M.Tech. program 
 
(i) A Master's degree in Engineering with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. (please refer to 
2.3.b) 
or 
Bachelor's degree in Engineering or Science (4-year programme) with a minimum of 75 percent 
marks/7.5 CPI and a valid GATE score (the requirement of GATE score is waived for candidates with 
Bachelor's degree in Engineering or Science (4-year programme) from the centrally funded technical 
institutes (CFTIs)). 
or 
a Master's degree in Science or an allied area while satisfying each of the following three criteria: 
(a) a minimum of 65 percent marks/6.5 CPI in the Master's degree, 
(b) first division in bachelor's degree, and 
(c) Valid JRF/GATE score. 
For admission into PhD in Biological Sciences and Bio Engineering, applicants having Master's degree 
in Pharmacy/Medicine/Veterinary Science with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum, or 
Bachelor's degree in Pharmacy/Medicine/Veterinary Science with a minimum of 75 percent marks/7.5 
CPI and a valid GATE score may also be considered. 
For admission into PhD in Computer Science and Engineering, applicants with Master in computer 
applications while satisfying each of the above criteria in (a), (b) and (c) may also be considered. 
(ii) A valid GATE score is required for the candidates with a Bachelor’s degree in 
Engineering/Design/Architecture, except in the case of candidates with Bachelor’s degree in 
Engineering or Science (4-year programme) /Design/Architecture from the Centrally Funded Technical 
Institutes (CFTIs). The candidates with Master’s degree in Science must either have a valid GATE score 
or must have qualified for/in JRF/NET. 
For admission into PhD in Biological Sciences and Bio Engineering and Space, Planetary & 
Astronomical Sciences & Engineering, the requirement of GATE/JRF/NET is waived for candidates 
having a Master's degree in Sciences/arts from IITs/ IISERs /NITs with a minimum CPI of 8.0. 
2.3.7. Ph.D. in Sciences (Includes Departments of BSBE, SEE, SPASE) 
(i) A Master's degree in the relevant subject or a Bachelor's degree in Engineering or Science (4-year 
programme) with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. (please refer to 2.3.b) 
(9) 
(ii) The candidate either must have a valid GATE score or must have qualified JRF. In addition to 
GATE/JRF, a valid JEST score is also an eligibility criterion for applying to the PhD programme in 
Physics. Candidates with the NBHM fellowship will be considered for PhD in Mathematics/Statistics. 
The requirement of GATE/JRF/JEST is waived for candidates having a Master's degree in Science from 
IITs/IISERs with a minimum CPI of 8.0. 
(iii) For Economic Sciences: 
(a) The candidate must have a Master's degree in economics or a Bachelor's degree in Engineering or 
Sciences (4 year programme) or a Master's degree in Sciences or in an allied field of economics with 
marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. 
(iv) For Economic Sciences and Earth Sciences: 
(a) The candidate must either have a valid GATE score or must have qualified JRF/NET. The 
requirement of GATE/JRF/NET/JEST is waived for candidates having a Master's degree in 
Sciences/arts from IITs/ IISERs / NITs with a minimum CPI of 8.0. (For Economics and Earth Sciences) 
2.3.8. Ph.D. in Humanities and Social Sciences 
Applicant must have a Master’s degree in relevant subject or Master degree in Engineering/technology 
with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum (please refer to 2.3.b). 
or 
a Bachelor's degree in Engineering or Science (4 year programme) with a minimum of 75 percent 
marks/7.5 CPI and a valid GATE score or must have qualified JRF ( NET in the case of Ph.D. 
programmes in Humanities) 
or 
a Master's degree in Sciences/(fine-arts)/arts/commerce or chartered accountant from or in an allied field 
of HSS or an allied area while satisfying each of the following criteria: 
(a) a minimum of 55 percent marks/5.5 CPI in the Master's degree or CPI not below the specified 
minimum. 
(b) first division in bachelor's degree, and 
(c) JRF/NET in a relevant discipline, GATE in Humanities and Social Sciences (XH) or any other 
national level exam 
 
For admission to the Ph.D. programmes in sciences and Humanities , the candidates from any 
background either must have a valid GATE score or must have qualified JRF ( NET in the case of Ph.D. 
programmes in Humanities ) , unless the candidates have a master' s degree in science /arts from IITs/ 
IISERs / NITs with a minimum CPI of 8.0. 
2.3.9. Ph.D. in Management 
i) A Master’s degree in management or relevant disciplines in Engineering / technology with marks / 
CPI not below the specified minimum. (please refer to 2.3.b) 
or 
a Bachelor's degree in Engineering or Science (4-year programme) with a minimum of 75 percent 
marks/7.5 CPI and a Valid GATE/CAT/GMAT score ( the requirement of GATE/CAT/GMAT score is 
waived for candidates with Bachelor's degree in Engineering or Science (4-year programme) from the 
centrally funded technical institutes (CFTIs)). 
or 
a Master's degree in Science/arts/commerce/chartered accountancy while satisfying each of the 
following three criteria: 
(a) a minimum of 65 percent marks/6.5 CPI in the Master's degree, 
(10) 
(b) first division in bachelor's degree, and 
(c) Valid JRF/GATE/CAT/GMAT/NET score or any other national level examination. 
 
(ii) A valid GATE score is required for the candidates with a bachelor’s degree in Engineering or 
Science (4-year programme), except in the case of candidates with Bachelor’s degree in Engineering or 
Science (4-year programme) from the centrally funded Technical Institutes (CFTIs). The candidates 
with Master’s degree in Science/arts/commerce must either have a valid GATE/CAT/GMAT score or 
must have qualified for/in JRF/NET. 
2.3.10 Ph.D. in Design 
 
A Master's degree in Engineering/Design with marks/CPI not below the specified minimum. (please 
refer to 2.3.b) 
or 
a Bachelor's degree in Engineering/Design (4-year)/architecture or Science (4-year programme with a 
minimum of 75 percent marks/7.5 CPI and a valid GATE/CEED score (the requirement of 
GATE/CEED score is waived for candidates with Bachelor's degree in Engineering / Design / 
Architecture or Science (4-year programme) from the centrally funded technical institutes (CFTIs)). 
or 
a Master's degree in Science or an allied area while satisfying each of the following three criteria: 
(a) a minimum of 65 percent marks/6.5 CPI in the Master's degree, 
(b) first division in bachelor's degree, and 
(c) Valid JRF/GATE/CEED score. 
 
(ii) A valid GATE/CEED score is required for the candidates with a Bachelor’s degree in 
Engineering/Design/Architecture or Science (4-year programme) / Master of Science (MSc), except in 
the case of candidates with Bachelor’s degree in Engineering /Design/Architecture or Science (4-year 
programme) / Master of Science (MSc) from the centrally funded Technical Institutes (CFTIs). 
 
For admission into PhD in Design, a 4-year bachelor's degree in design/architecture will be considered 
equivalent to a bachelor’s degree in engineering., and CEED score can be used as a replacement for 
GATE score for fulfilling criterion (c) above. 
 
2.3.11 Ph.D. in Cognitive Science 
 
Applicants must have a MA/M.Sc/M.Phil/MS/equivalent degree (Cognitive Science/ Psychology/ 
Linguistics/Philosophy/ Anthropology/ Physics/ Chemistry/ Mathematics/ Statistics/ Bio Sciences/ 
related disciplines) with a minimum of 60%/6.0 marks/CPI in the qualifying degree. Applicants should 
have a valid score/qualification in GATE/ CSIR/ JRF/ NET/ COGJET/ other equivalent exam. 
Applicants from IITs with a minimum CPI of 8.0 are exempted from the GATE/ CSIR/ JRF/ NET 
requirement. Applicants with M.Sc. in Cognitive Science are also exempted from the 
GATE/CSIR/JRF/NET requirement. 
or 
M.Tech/ME/MD (any branch) with a minimum of 60%/6.0 marks/CPI in the qualifying degree. 
or 
B.Tech/BE 
(any 
branch), 
BS 
4-year 
programme 
(Physics/ 
Chemistry/ 
Mathematics/ 
Statistics/Biosciences/ related sciences), MBBS. Applicant must have a minimum of 75%/7.5 marks/CPI 
in the qualifying degree. Should have a valid score/qualification in GATE/ CSIR/ JRF/ NET/ COGJET/ 
other equivalent exam. Applicants from CFTIs (centrally funded technical institutions) with a minimum 
CPI of 7.5 and those with an MBBS degree are exempted from the GATE/ CSIR/ JRF/NET 
requirement. 
 
(11) 
2.3.12. MSc and MSPD programme 
The applicant should have a valid JAM score. 
2.4 Admission Procedure  
The applicants must apply for admission through online application portal or offline on prescribed form, 
as per the admission notification. There are only three cases wherein requirement of advance application 
to be made is not required (see 2.4.13-2.4.15).   
2.4.1. All admissions will be made on approval by the Chairman, Senate on the recommendations of the 
duly constituted selection committees and the Chairperson, SPGC. A selection committee will consist of 
faculty members, one of whom will be from another department unless the selection committee is 
constituted for provisional PhD admissions by visiting the institutes outside Kanpur. The constitution of 
the selection committee will be proposed by the DPGC and approved by the Chairperson, SPGC. The 
admission committee for the foreign national candidates should be approved by the head of the 
department and there is no requirement of an external member from another department. 
2.4.2. Separate selection committees may be appointed to select candidates belonging to different 
categories, viz., sponsored, regular, QIP etc.  
2.4.3. A valid GATE/CEED score is required for admission to the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research 
programme in the case of regular candidates. These admissions may be made directly based on the 
GATE/CEED scores of the candidates and performance in the qualifying examination, and in addition, 
some of the candidates may also be called for written tests and/or interviews.  
The requirement of GATE score is waived for the candidates with M.B.B.S. degree as well as for the 
B.Tech. graduates from IITs with a minimum overall CPI of 6.5 and a minimum CPI of 8.0 in the last 
two years in B.Tech. 
2.4.4. Candidates for D.IIT programme will be called for interview and may in addition be asked to take 
a written test.  
2.4.5. A valid CAT score is required for admission to the MBA programme. These admissions will be 
made based on the CAT score and performance in the interview and/or group discussion. 
2.4.6. Admission to the Ph.D. programmes will be based on written tests and/or interviews of the 
candidates shortlisted by the DPGC of the department concerned.  
A valid GATE/CEED score is required for the candidates with bachelor’s degree in 
engineering/design/architecture, except in the case of candidates with bachelor’s degree in engineering 
from the centrally funded technical institutes (CFTIs). However, all of them are required to have a CPI 
above 7.5 to satisfy the eligibility criterion laid down in section 2.3 above. 
The candidates with master’s degree in science/arts/commerce must either have a valid GATE/CEED/ 
CAT/GMAT score or must have qualified for/in JRF/NET.  
For admission to the Ph.D. programmes in sciences and Humanities, the candidates from any 
background either must have a valid GATE score or must have qualified JRF (NET in the case of Ph.D. 
programmes in Humanities), unless the candidates have a master’s degree in science/arts from IITs with 
a minimum CPI of 8.0. 
(12) 
2.4.7. The admission of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates will be decided without 
comparing them with the general category candidates.  
2.4.8. Candidates undergoing the final year of the qualifying degree may be considered for provisional 
admission 
provided 
they 
give 
an 
undertaking 
that 
the 
final 
examinations 
(including 
theory/practical/project/thesis examination) of the qualifying degree will be over before the date of 
registration as specified in the Academic Calendar of the Institute. The provisional admission of such 
candidates may automatically stand withdrawn if they fail to produce the proof of having appeared in 
final examinations of the qualifying degree by the day of registration.  
2.4.9. (a) The provisions in para 2.4.8 shall not be applicable in the case of M.Tech./M. Des. students of 
the Institute, who have been provisionally selected for admission to a Ph.D. programme. These students 
may be provisionally admitted to the Ph.D. programme provided they give an undertaking that the final 
examinations (including theory/practical/project/thesis examination) of the qualifying degree will be 
over before the date of late registration as specified in the Academic Calendar. The provisional 
admissions of such candidates may automatically stand withdrawn if they fail to produce the proof of 
having appeared in final examinations of the qualifying degree by the late registration date as specified 
in the Academic Calendar.  
(b) The provisions of para 2.4.8. shall also not be applicable to candidates admitted to a Ph.D. 
programme with qualifying degree of MS by Research (from institute or elsewhere). These candidates 
may be provisionally admitted to the Ph.D. programme provided they give an undertaking that they will 
submit their MS by Research thesis for examination to their institute before the date of registration as 
specified in the Academic Calendar. The provisional admission of such candidates may automatically 
stand withdrawn if they fail to produce the proof of having submitted their thesis by the day of 
registration.  
2.4.10. On approval by the Chairman, Senate, the departments will issue the admission letters to the 
candidates who will be required to accept the offer of admission by depositing the prescribed fee before 
the specified date.  
2.4.11. In case a candidate does not accept the offer by paying the prescribed fee by the specified date, 
the offer of admission may stand withdrawn, and the admission may be offered to the candidates in the 
waiting list, if any, in the order of merit.  
2.4.12. The offer of admission may also stand withdrawn if the candidate who has accepted the offer 
fails to register by the date for late registration.  
2.4.13. Immediately post declaration of results of reputed competitive examinations for admission into 
post- graduate programs (e.g. GATE, NET etc), interested departments/IDPs are permitted to admit 
examination toppers to their post-graduate programs, strictly in the order of ascending ranks in the 
examination. The number of such offers shall be limited by the number of available seats in each 
category with applicable attrition (if any). Total number of offers made must follow applicable 
reservation rules. The competitive examination should preferably be an eligibility requirement for 
admission into at least one of PG programs of the department/IDP.  
2.4.14. Provisional PhD Admission Offer to 4th year B Tech/BS Students: Provisional PhD 
admission may be offered to B.Tech./B.S. students (in their 7th and 8th semesters) from centrally funded 
technical institutes (CFTIs) and top 100 institutes in Engineering (based on NIRF ranking) based on the 
results of their 6th or 7th semester. Such offers would be subject to the fulfilment of the stipulations in 
Sections 2.3, 2.4.1 and 2.4.6. The students from non-CFTIs who are offered admissions may qualify JRF 
or GATE post-offer but before the date of first registration. All formalities related to these admissions 
(13) 
including acceptance should be completed before the commencement of the regular admission process 
in April. 
Provisional PhD Admission Offer to 2nd year MTech/MSR/M.Des. students: Provisional PhD 
admission may be offered to MTech/MSR/M.Des. students (in their 3rd and 4th semesters) from 
centrally funded technical institutes (CFTIs) having a CPI of 8.0 or above based on the coursework. 
Such offers would be subject to the fulfilment of the stipulations in Sections 2.3, 2.4.1 and 2.4.6. All 
formalities related to these admissions including acceptance should be completed before the 
commencement of the regular admission process in April. 
2.4.15. Provisional admission to PhD in Sciences can be offered to 2-year MSc students of IITs with 
CPI 8.5 or above after 3rd semester subject to their fulfilling the eligibility criteria under Clause 2.4.6 at 
the time of graduation. All formalities related to these admissions including acceptance should be 
completed before the commencement of our regular admission process in April. A special selection 
committee (duly approved by SPGC) should be entrusted with the responsibility of operationalizing this 
provision. 
2.5. Admission of Quality Improvement Programme (QIP) Candidates and Defence Personnel  
The procedures and requirements for admission of QIP and defence personnel candidates will be as per 
the prescribed existing procedure. These candidates will have to satisfy the prescribed minimum marks 
and qualifications as laid down in Section 2.3. 
2.6. Admission of Indian Nationals Residing Abroad (INRA) and Foreign Nationals  
2.6.1. INRA candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of 
applying for admission. Their applications may be processed by the departments as and when they are 
received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. The applications should be 
scrutinized to make sure that, both in terms of qualifications and attainment they are comparable with 
the candidates admitted in the general category. 
2.6.2. The applications of foreign nationals, who are sponsored by the Indian Council of Cultural 
Relations (ICCR) will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for 
admission to the programme. The department's recommendation will be sent to the Chairman, Senate 
through the Chairperson, SPGC.  
2.6.3. The applications of non-sponsored foreign national candidates will also be considered for 
admission to the postgraduate programmes. Such candidates who are in India and are seeking admission 
to the M.Tech./M.S. by Research (or M.Des./M.B.A.) programme must satisfy the same GATE (or 
CEED/CAT) requirements (if eligible to take it) as the candidates in the general category. However, 
application of a candidate who is in India and has not been able to take GATE/CEED/CAT for valid 
reasons, will be considered by the department concerned on its merit. Admission of such candidates will 
be subject to no-objection from the Department of Education, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development.  
2.7. Admission to External Registration Programme for M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research and 
Ph.D. (Engg. and Earth Sciences)  
2.7.1. A candidate working in an R & D establishment which is equipped with the necessary research 
and library facilities may be considered for admission only to the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research 
and Ph.D. (Engineering & Earth Sciences) programmes. Such a candidate must be sponsored by his/her 
employer and must have been in employment with the sponsoring organization for at least 2 year at the 
time of admission. The employer must expressly undertake to pay full salary to the candidate and relieve 
(14) 
him/her to stay on the campus to enable the candidate to complete the requirements specified in Section 
7.1, footnote 2.  
 
2.7.2. For fellows and employees of research labs, centers of excellence, and other organizations such as 
DRDO, CSIR, DAE, DoS, DIT, DST, DBT, ICMR, ICAR, NGRI, GSI, Wadia Institute etc., fully 
funded by the government (central/state), the minimum employment requirement will be only one year. 
The reduced employment requirement will also be applicable to employees of public sector unit (PSU) 
and central and state universities fully funded by the government. 
2.7.3. A candidate applying for admission to the external registration programme must provide detailed 
information about the research facilities available at his/her organization and a certificate that these 
would be available to him/her for carrying out research. He/she should also provide the biodata of the 
prospective supervisor who would supervise the candidate's work at his/her organization.  
2.7.4. On the recommendation of the DPGC, the SPGC will approve an organization for carrying out 
M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/Ph.D. research in a specified area. An application for admission from 
a candidate working in the approved organization will be considered only if he/she wishes to work in the 
specified area.  
2.8. Admission of Sponsored Candidates  
2.8.1. A candidate who is sponsored by his/her employer and who meets the additional conditions 
specified below may be admitted through a separate selection committee appointed specifically for the 
purpose.  
2.8.2. A sponsored candidate must have been in service of the sponsoring organization for at least two 
years at the time of admission. The sponsoring organization must specifically undertake to provide full 
salary to the candidate and to relieve him/her to pursue the programme for its full duration. For project 
employees of IIT Kanpur seeking admission to the M.S. by Research programme, the candidate should 
have been working on a project at IIT Kanpur for at least one year at the time of admission instead of the 
two years requirement mentioned above. 
2.8.3. Fulfillment of GATE requirement as in Sections 2.4.3 and 2.4.6 (but not as in Sections 2.3.6, 2.3.9 
and 2.3.10) may be waived for such candidates. However, the sponsored candidates seeking admission 
to the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research programme who have not qualified GATE will be called for 
interview and may in addition be asked to take a written test.  
 
2.9. Admission to Part-Time Programmes  
2.9.1. The Institute also offers part-time postgraduate programmes leading to the M.Tech./M.S. by 
Research/M.Des./Ph.D. degrees for professionally employed personnel such as working engineers, 
scientists and teachers who can, while employed, attend regular classes as per schedule of the Institute. 
The employer must provide undertaking to relieve the candidate to finish required course credits (and 
pass comprehensive and state-of-the-art for PhD) of respective program as per the institute's schedule, as 
applicable. The course instructors will have to maintain the attendance record of all part-time students in 
their courses. 
 
2.9.2. The applicant must be an employee of a recognized organization with at least two years of service 
at the time of admission and be engaged in professional work in the area to which admission is sought. 
An application for the part-time studies forwarded by the employer should be sent to the Convener, 
DPGC of the department concerned. For employees of IIT Kanpur (project or regular) seeking 
admission to the M.S. by Research programme as a part-time candidate, the two-year service 
requirement may be relaxed by one year.   
(15) 
2.9.3. Fulfillment of GATE requirement as in Sections 2.4.3 and 2.4.6 (but not as in Sections 2.3.6, 2.3.9 
and 2.3.10) may be waived for such candidates. This is also applicable to the part-time candidates 
seeking admission to the M.S. by Research programme, who are employees of IIT Kanpur (project or 
regular) with an appointment and support for at least one year from the date of admission. However, the 
part-time candidates seeking admission to the M.Tech./M.S. by Research programme, who have not 
qualified GATE, will be called for interview and may in addition be asked to take a written test.  
2.9.4. For an employee of IIT Kanpur (project or regular) with a valid GATE/CEED/CAT/GMAT/JRF 
(NET in the case of Ph.D. programmes in HSS) score at the time of seeking admission for part-time 
M.Tech./M.Des/M.S. by Research/Ph.D program, the requirement of two years of service may be 
waived. 
 
2.10. Admission of Non-Degree Students  
 
2.10.1. A non-degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or 
university in India or abroad, and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete 
part of his/her academic requirements at I.I.T. Kanpur. For that purpose the non-degree student may 
carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities. However, 
any credits earned by a non-degree student cannot be applied for any degree programme at I.I.T. Kanpur 
at any time.  
2.10.2. A candidate will be admitted as a non-degree student on a duly sponsored application to the 
Dean of Academic Affairs who will recommend admission on the advice of DPGC and SPGC to the 
Chairman Senate for approval. The strength of non-degree students in any programme should not be 
more than 5% of the programme strength.  
2.10.3. Students so admitted will be governed by all rules, regulations and discipline of the Institute. 
2.11. Admission as Full-time Students for candidates with Employment 
People in regular employment can seek admission to IIT Kanpur as a full-time student without resigning 
from their job subject to production of extra-ordinary leave from service for the full duration of the 
program. For PhD students, the candidate must take at least 3 years of extra ordinary leave which should 
preferably be for 5 Years. For MTech/MSR/MDes students, the extra-ordinary leave should be for a 
period of 2 years. If the student is unable to finish the academic programme within the sanctioned leave 
period, then he/she can convert the academic programme into Part-Time category subject to production 
of NoC from his/her parent organization and satisfying the criterion laid down in section 4.8 below. 
3. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  
3.1. The Institute may provide to postgraduate students, financial assistance in the form of teaching or 
research assistantships (referred to as Institute Assistantship). Assistantships are awarded on a semester 
to semester basis for a period of up to 22 months for M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research students and 
up to five years for Ph.D. students. The stipend for the assistantship is paid at the approved rates. A 
student is expected to devote up to eight hours per week towards job(s) assigned to him/her. The 
renewal of assistantship is contingent on the student's satisfactory performance in the academic 
programme and in the discharge of assistantship duties. 
3.2. Some financial assistantships in the form of research assistantships may also be available from 
sponsored research projects. Additional assistantships in the form of scholarships, fellowships, etc. may 
(16) 
be available through other organizations, such as, the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(CSIR), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), etc. 
3.3. In addition to the students admitted with financial assistance, students may also be admitted to the 
M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/Ph.D. programmes on a self-financing basis.  
3.4. A valid GATE/CEED/CAT/GMAT score or qualifying for JRF is required for awarding Institute 
Assistantship to M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research students and to Ph.D. students in 
engineering/design/management departments/IDPs without a M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/ 
M.B.A. degree. This requirement is waived in the case of M.Tech. students, for those with M.B.B.S. 
degree and for those who are B.Tech. graduates from IITs with a minimum CPI of 8.00. In the case of 
Ph.D. students, this requirement is waived for those with bachelor’s degree in engineering from CFTIs. 
For the Ph.D. students in Science/Humanities departments, a valid GATE score or qualifying for JRF 
(NET in the case of Humanities department) is required for awarding Institute Assistantship, except 
when the candidates have a master’s degree in science/arts from IITs /IISERs/NITs with a minimum CPI 
of 8.0. For PhD students in Physics, a valid JEST (Joint Entrance Screening Test) score also qualifies 
them for award of Institute Assistantship. 
 
3.5. For M.S. by Research students who are project employees of IIT Kanpur, there is a minimum 
commitment of support from the project for one year. On the completion of one year, it is expected 
that such candidates will continue to be supported by PI (possibly through other projects, if the 
current project is over), or by the department (through DPA or other such projects). In case, there is 
no support available from PI/Department, no financial support will/can be provided to the student, 
from the Institute funds at the level of M.Tech. assistantship even if s/he has a valid GATE score, as 
the students are admitted under sponsored category.  
 
3.6. All MSPD students are eligible to get a financial assistantship in the first semester. For subsequent 
semesters, they must have a minimum CPI of 6.5 to avail this assistantship. For students with a CPI of 
less than 6.5, the assistantship will be discontinued until their CPI rises to 6.5 or above and shall be 
resumed in the following semester, provided they have not migratedas PhD student. If an MSPD student 
has not migrated as PhD student at the end of four semesters, due to reasons such as backlogs and 
semester drops, and the CPI is not less than 6.5, then the assistantship, which had earlier been withheld, 
may be awarded. The decision will be taken on case-to-case basis. In no case, a student will receive this 
assistantship for more than a total of four semesters.  
4. REGISTRATION 
4.a. A student is required to register for I semester, II semester and Summer term for the courses/thesis 
credits that he/she intends to pursue in that semester/term. 
Academic pre-registration: Academic pre-registration is compulsory for all PG students. If due to an 
unavoidable reason, a student is unable to do academic pre-registration during the period specified in the 
academic calendar, the student can register online for the courses/credits on the date of registration in 
the next semester with an additional fee/fine imposed for not completing the pre-registration process. 
This additional fee/fine can be waived only on compelling grounds on a case-to-case basis upon the 
recommendation from the DPGC, Convenor by the Chairperson, SPGC. 
The registration process involves: 
i) submitting a duly approved course programme to be followed in the semester/term, 
ii) ii) payment of fees for that semester/term and clearance of any outstanding dues, and 
iii) iii) signing the registration roll with the office of the Dean of Students Affairs. 
(17) 
4.b. A new entrant (to the postgraduate programme) (except those to a Ph.D. programme with qualifying 
degree of MS by Research) who is awaiting the results of the qualifying examination, will be allowed to 
register "provisionally" on submission of a certificate from his/her institution certifying that he/she has 
appeared in the final qualifying examination (including all papers in theory, practical, project, oral, etc.). 
The candidate will submit attested copies of the certificates of having passed the qualifying examination 
by the last date for document submission as specified in the academic calendar (usually about 8 weeks 
from the date of registration), failing which the provisional admission as well as registration may be 
cancelled by the Chairman Senate, on the recommendation of the SPGC. 
 
A new entrant to a Ph.D. programme with qualifying degree of MS by Research, who is awaiting oral 
examination of his/her MS by Research thesis, will be allowed to register "provisionally" on submission 
of a certificate from his/her institution certifying that he/she has submitted the thesis of MS by Research. 
The candidate will submit attested copies of the certificates of having passed the qualifying examination 
with the minimum specified qualifying marks, by the last day of classes in the relevant semester as 
specified in the academic calendar, failing which the provisional admission as well as registration may 
be cancelled by the Chairman Senate, on the recommendation of the SPGC.  
4.c. All students who are not on authorized leave must continue to register in the following 
semester/term till they submit their thesis. If, however, a student is likely to submit his/her thesis within 
two weeks from the commencement of classes, he/she need not register in that semester/term. This 
period will not be extended in any case.  
4.d. Ph.D. students who have submitted their thesis and are waiting for the defence of the thesis will 
register for zero thesis credits. They may, however, apply for leave from the Institute with permission to 
defend thesis while on leave. Those postgraduate students may also register for zero thesis credits in a 
summer term who have not been assigned a thesis supervisor yet or who have already completed their 
minimum credit requirements. 
4.e. In very special cases, students who have completed all the experimental work and analysis related to 
the thesis and are on sanctioned leave, the SPGC on the specific recommendations of the DPGC may 
allow submission of thesis without registration.  
4.f. On the recommendation of the DPGC and the approval of the SPGC, the employees of IITK and 
QIP students registered for the Ph.D. programmes who have completed the course and thesis credit 
requirements, may not register in the following semester/term, provided they have completed 
experimental work related to their thesis. However, they will be required to submit their thesis within 
the prescribed maximum period (specified in Section 7.1). 
4.g. If maternity leave (granted before the date of registration) extends beyond the date of late 
registration, the student will be allowed to register only for thesis credits in that semester/term. The 
number of credits that a student will be allowed to register will be worked out on a prorata basis.  
4.h. A student in the external registration programme must complete the requirements as laid down in 
Section 7.1 under footnote 2 before the beginning of the semester in which he/she wants to register for 
thesis credits for the first time.  
 
4.i. The student in the external registration programme who has completed the requirements as laid 
down in Section 7.1 under footnote 2 can register for the next semester anytime starting from one week 
prior to the end of the current semester (i.e., the semester in which he/she fulfills the requirements as 
laid down in Section 7.1 under footnote 2) or the date of being awarded grades for the current semester, 
whichever is later, till the late registration date of the next semester. 
(18) 
 
4.1. Late Registration  
4.1.1. If for any compelling reason like illness, a student is unable to register on the day of registration, 
he/she will be allowed to register on the day of late registration specified in the academic calendar 
(which is about one week from the date of registration). Any student registering late will be required to 
pay the specified late registration fee.  
4.1.2. In exceptional cases, the SPGC on the recommendation of the DPGC may consider registration 
beyond the date of late registration. In such a case, the student will be allowed to register for thesis 
credits only.  
4.2. Academic Advising  
4.2.1. A student will be advised in the selection of courses by the registration adviser appointed by the 
DPGC of the concerned department. A student registering for thesis credits must have a thesis 
supervisor assigned to him/her.  
4.2.2. Except for M.Sc. students, a student may be permitted to repeat or substitute courses in which 
he/she has obtained D+, D, E, F, or X grades. A M.Sc. student can only repeat courses in which s/he has 
obtained E/F/X grades. Permission to repeat/substitute a course will be governed by the guidelines laid 
down in Section 7.6. The request for repeat or substitution of a course must be given in writing duly 
endorsed by the DPGC to the Academic Section at the time of registration. 
4.3. Semester Load Requirements   
4.3.1. The normal semester load is defined as equivalent of 36 credits. For a well-merited case, the 
SPGC may permit a student to register for a maximum of 45 credits or a minimum of 27 credits.  
4.3.2. The normal semester load for a part-time student is equivalent of 18 credits. For a well-merited 
case, the SPGC may permit a student to register for a maximum of 36 credits and a minimum of 17 
credits during a regular semester. A part-time M.S. by Research student employed on a sponsored 
research project in the Institute may register for 36 credits, if he/she is only registered for thesis credits 
and his/her thesis work is aligned with the project work. If a part-time M.S. by Research student gets 
financial assistance from the department/IDP or the Institute, he/she must register as a full-time student. 
4.3.3. A student in the external registration programme when registering for thesis research, to be carried 
out at his/her organization, can register for a maximum of 27 credits or a minimum of 9 credits during 
the regular semester.  
4.3.4. Notwithstanding the provisions of 4.3.1, a normal semester load is defined as equivalent of 60 
credits for an MBA student. For a well-merited case, the SPGC may permit a student to register for a 
maximum of 70 credits and a minimum of 40 credits. 
4.3.5. Notwithstanding the provisions of 4.3.1, a normal semester load is defined as equivalent of 50 
credits for MSc/MSPD student. For a well-merited case, the SPGC may permit a student to register for a 
maximum of 65 credits and a minimum of 35 credits. 
4.4. Summer-Term Registration  
A student is required to register in the summer term for up to a maximum of half the normal semester 
load except in the case of a M.Sc. student. A M.Sc. student may choose to register for a maximum of 27 
(19) 
credits. The students in the external registration program and the students who are waiting for the 
defense of their thesis are not required to register for the summer term. Part time students may apply for 
waiver for summer term registration. The request should be duly recommended by the supervisor and 
DPGC, Convenor. A waiver be granted upon an explicit request by the individual. 
4.5. Adding/Dropping of Courses and Withdrawing from Courses  
4.5.1. Adding and dropping of courses after registration is permitted only if the student's request is 
endorsed by the instructor of the course that he/she is adding or dropping and is also endorsed by the 
Convener DPGC. The last dates of applying for adding and dropping of courses are specified in the 
academic calendar.  
4.5.2. A student may be required to drop a course at any stage if it is determined that he/she does not 
fulfil the prerequisites for the course, or if a timetable clash exists which does not permit him/her to 
attend all the meetings of the course, or any rule in this manual which forbids him/her to take the 
course(s) that he/she has registered for. A student may also be de-registered from a course on the 
recommendation of course instructor for unauthorized absence from classes. 
4.5.3. A PG student can be permitted to drop a course upto four weeks prior to the end semester 
examination with the consent of the instructor in charge of the course and recommendation of the 
Convener, DPGC subject to the requirement that the reduced load shall not be less than the minimum 
semester load specified in section 4.3. 
4.6. Change of Registration from M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/MSc/MBA Programme to 
Ph.D. Programme.  
 
A student registered for the M.Tech./M. Des./M.S. by Research programme may be allowed in the 
beginning of the second / third / fourth / fifth semester to change his/her registration to that of the Ph.D. 
programme in Engineering, Management, Earth Sciences or Design on the recommendation of DPGC 
and with the approval of SPGC. The application has to be submitted at least two weeks before the start 
of the semester. Since this is a change of programme, Section 2.3 rules are not automatically applicable 
for change to Ph.D. programme in Engineering, Management or Design. Instead, one of the following 
two conditions must be satisfied: 
 
4.6.(a) The student satisfies the eligibility criteria of Section 2.3.6, 2.3.9 or 2.3.10 and has completed 
one/two/three semesters of the M.Tech./M.Des/M.S. by Research programme with a minimum of 27 
credits through course work, and has a CPI of at least 7.0. 
 
4.6.(b) The student does not satisfy the eligibility criteria of Section 2.3.6, 2.3.9 or 2.3.10; however, 
he/she has completed two/three semesters of the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research programme as well 
as has completed course requirements of the M.Tech./ M.Des./M.S. by Research programme with a CPI 
of at least 7.0. 
 
4.6 (c) For MBA programme kindly refer to Annexure V. 
 
4.6.(d) For MSc programme, refer Annexure VI 
 
Such a change of registration shall be reported to the Senate. Students in part-time M.Tech./M.S. by 
Research programme are not permitted to change over to part-time Ph.D. programme. 
4.7. Change of Registration from Part-Time to Full-Time Programme  
(20) 
A student admitted to a part-time programme may be allowed to change his/her registration to full-time 
(regular) studies at the beginning of a semester upon the recommendation of the DPGC and with the 
approval of the SPGC. For the purpose of determining the maximum period of stay (specified in Section 
7.1), one-half of the period spent as a part-time student will be counted.  
4.8. Change of Registration from Full-Time to Part-Time in M.Tech. /MS (By Research) / M.Des / 
Ph.D. Programmes  
4.8.1 A student admitted to a full-time M.Tech. / M.Des / MS (By Research) / Ph.D. programme may be 
permitted to change to a part-time M.Tech. / M.Des. / MS (By Research) / Ph.D. programme on account 
of a job offer. A student requesting such a conversion must have 
  
(i) completed the coursework, passed the comprehensive examination (not applicable to 
M.Tech./M.Des/MS by Research), given the "State of Art" seminar which is adjudged as satisfactory 
(not applicable to M.Tech./M.Des./MS by Research). 
(ii) is required to produce a No Objection Certificate from the Head of the institution, which he/she has 
joined. In case the ‘No Objection Certificate’ is not submitted by the end of the period of leave, the 
student is required to rejoin the Institute, or else withdraw from his/her M.Tech./M.Des./MS by 
Research/Ph.D. programme. 
(iii) may be granted leave up to one semester, to be extended by one more semester, if required, to join 
the job if he/she satisfies condition (i). 
(iv) got the request endorsed by the supervisor(s) and the DPGC, Convenor. 
 
4.8.2 Such conversion from full-time to part-time, if approved by the SPGC, will be subject to the 
following conditions: 
(i) The student must complete his/her thesis within 7 years (for PhD) / 4 years (for M.Tech./M.Des./MS 
by Research) counted from the date of his/her first registration in the programme, 
(ii) provision of conversion from full-time to part-time status can be availed only once by the student 
during his/her programme, and 
(iii) the status of the student will be reviewed by the supervisor and the DPGC at least once every two 
semesters after the conversion, and his/her continuation on part-time status will be subject to his/her 
making satisfactory progress towards completing the M.Tech./M.Des./MS by Research/Ph.D. thesis. 
5. LEAVE RULES  
Students may be granted leave under Sections 5.1 and 5.2 on application to DPGC of the concerned 
Department. Leave under Sections 5.3 and 5.4 will be sanctioned by SPGC on the recommendation of 
DPGC. Applications must be submitted well in advance of the date of commencement of the leave 
requested. Leave for a period longer than that specified in Sections 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 may be sanctioned 
by SPGC on the recommendation of DPGC and it will entail loss of financial assistantship for the 
extended period. A M.Sc. student may be granted only casual, medical, and semester/term leave. 
5.1. Personal Leave and Casual Leave 
5.1.1. A postgraduate student may take a maximum of 30 days of personal leave in an academic year 
(including winter break and mid-semester breaks) such that no more than 10 days of leave are taken 
during a semester. However, this 10-day cap will not be enforced when semesters are not in progress 
and during the summer term. Leave not availed in one academic year may be carried over to the next 
academic year up to a maximum of 15 days.  
5.1.2. In addition, a student may be allowed casual leave for up to 6 days during a semester and 4 days 
during the summer term. The casual leave cannot be carried over. 
(21) 
5.1.3. There will be no loss of financial assistantship for students going on personal or casual leave. 
5.1.4. Weekends or gazetted holidays falling within the period of the leave will be counted as personal 
leave but will not be counted as casual leave. Suppose, if a student applies for personal leave from 
Friday to Monday, then Saturday and Sunday will be counted in the leave period, i.e, a total of four days 
will be counted as leave. However, if a student applies for casual leave from Friday to Monday, then 
Saturday and Sunday will not be counted in the leave period, i.e, a total of two days will be counted as 
leave.  
 
5.2. Medical Leave  
 
Leave on medical ground, duly supported by a medical certificate, may be granted to a student for up to 
8 days per semester and 4 days during the summer term. Leave not availed may be carried over to the 
next semester/term up to a maximum of 8 days in the case of carry over to semester and 4 days in the 
case of carry over to term. However, at a stretch, the medical leave shall not exceed 15 days during a 
semester and 8 days during the summer term. Such leave shall not entail any loss of financial 
assistantship.  
 
5.3. Maternity Leave/Paternity leave 
 
5.3a. Maternity Leave  
 
A female student may be granted maternity leave for a maximum of 180 days each for up to two 
children. Leave up to 6 weeks can also be granted for miscarriage including medical termination of 
pregnancy, if supported by a proper medical certificate. Such leave can be combined with any other 
leave due and will not entail any loss of financial assistantship. Such leave applications are subjected to 
the approval of Chairperson, SPGC. If the candidate has availed maternity leave during registration 
period, registration may be allowed retrospectively. 
 
5.3b. Paternity Leave 
A male student may be granted paternity leave for a maximum of 15 working days each for up to two 
children. Such leave can be combined with any other leave due and will not entail any loss of financial 
assistantship. Such leave applications are subjected to the approval of Chairperson, SPGC. 
 
5.4. Semester Leave/Term Leave  
Semester leave for up to a maximum of two semesters and a summer term for M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by 
Research/Ph.D. students may be sanctioned for bonafide reasons. Except for medical reasons, such leave 
would not normally be sanctioned before a student has completed his/her minimum total credit 
requirements and in no case before the student has spent two semesters and a summer term in the 
programme. However, on medical considerations such leave may be sanctioned after his/her stay of one 
semester. Leave for more than one semester/term at a time will not be granted. No semester leave will 
be granted to D.IIT. students. 
5.5. Medical Certificate  
If a student falls ill while on the IITK campus, the medical certificate must be obtained from the 
Institute's medical officer. If he/she falls ill outside the campus while on sanctioned leave, the medical 
certificate must be obtained from a registered medical practitioner.  
5.6.  Absence for less than a semester/term  
(22) 
Except in the case of M.Sc. students, if a registered student is absent on sanctioned leave for a period of 
4 weeks or more during a semester or 1 week or more during the summer term at a stretch, SPGC may 
decide to convert the leave to a semester/term leave, or reduce the thesis credits (in blocks of 9 credits) 
appropriately, in case the student is registered only for thesis credits. 
For M.Sc. students, absence from all academic activities for more than 20 working days (not necessarily 
contiguous) in a semester, with or without sanctioned leave, will result in the cancellation of registration 
from all courses in that semester (i.e., semester leave) on the recommendation of the DPGC and 
approval of SPGC. The corresponding number of days of absence for a summer term is 10. 
5.7 Absence without Sanctioned Leave  
Except in the case of M.Sc. students, absence without sanctioned leave will entail loss of financial 
assistantship for the period of absence and may result in the termination of the student's programme on 
the recommendation of the DPGC and approval of SPGC.  
For M.Sc. students, absence from all academic activities for more than 30 working days contiguously in 
a semester without sanctioned leave or absence from end-semester exams in all the courses in which 
s/he is registered, without compelling reason, will result in the termination of the student's programme 
on the recommendation of the DPGC and approval of SPGC. 
6. PERMISSION TO PROCEED FOR ACADEMIC WORK OUTSIDE IITK  
6.1 Permission to Proceed to Other Academic Institutions as Non-Degree Students 
In order to help-students broaden their horizons and enrich their cultural and academic experience, 
provision to proceed to other academic and research institutions in India or abroad as nondegree students 
is available. Rules and procedures to be followed for availing this provision are as follows: 
i) An M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/MSc/Ph.D. student who satisfies the minimum conditions laid 
down in para (ii) below may proceed to another academic institution in India or abroad with prior 
permission of the SPGC on the recommendation of the DPGC. A MSc student is permitted to spend 
time as a non-degree student elsewhere up to one semester and/or one summer term. 
ii) PG Students who have spent at least two semesters and have a CPI of at least 8.0 are eligible to 
proceed as non-degree students elsewhere except in the case of MSc students. For a MSc student, the 
minimum CPI and credits through coursework are 7.0 and 100, respectively. 
iii) For permission to spend time as a non-degree student elsewhere, an eligible student will make an 
application to the SPGC through the DPGC, duly supported by a statement of purpose to undertake the 
proposed work and sufficient information about the department/institution for the purposes of para (iv) 
below.  
iv) The DPGC will consider the student's application and will determine if the proposed programme of 
work is of such a nature that waiver for at least 18 credits per regular semester or 9 credits per summer 
term is possible. The SPGC may approve the application on the recommendation of the DPGC. In all 
such cases, the student will be informed about the requirements he/she must fulfill to apply for academic 
credit on his/her return.  
v) Permission to proceed to an institution as a nondegree student does not imply that the student will 
automatically get any waiver from the academic requirements of IIT Kanpur.  
(23) 
vi) The student after completion of the work, will apply for waiver from requirements of his/her 
programme at IIT Kanpur supported by an official transcript of the grades obtained and whatever 
material the DPGC may require for the purpose given in para (vii) below.  
vii) The concerned DPGC will evaluate the work done by the student and will make recommendations 
to the SPGC after determining by whatever means it deems fit, the equivalent IIT Kanpur 
courses/requirements for which the student may be given a waiver.  
viii) On the recommendation of the DPGC, the SPGC may allow the waiver for a maximum of 36 
credits for M.Tech / M.Des/ MS (By Research) /PhD students and 60 credits for MSc student. Against 
each requirement for which a waiver is granted, a W would appear on the transcript with an explanatory 
note that W stands for waiver for work done at the Institution concerned. All such requirements will be 
deemed to carry zero weight for SPI/CPI calculations.  
ix) The minimum residence requirement for the students who avail this provision will remain unchanged 
for Ph.D. students but may be reduced by one semester for M. Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research students, 
provided they spend at least one semester of 16 weeks duration or two quarters of at least 11 weeks 
duration each as non-degree students elsewhere with prior permission. This reduction in the minimum 
residence requirement is also applicable to the M.Sc. students, provided they spend at least one semester 
of 16 weeks duration as non-degree students elsewhere with prior permission. 
x) Those students who are selected by the Institute using a Senate-prescribed procedure to proceed on 
any institutional exchange programme, except for the students going under the DAAD fellowship 
programme, will also have to go through the procedure and rules for the transfer of credits as outlined in 
paras (vi), (vii), (viii) and (ix) above. 
6.2 Permission to Proceed for Academic Activities  
The PG students can be permitted to proceed for academic activities outside IITK to carry out field 
work, library work, computational work, experimental work, and Lab works, and also to attend 
conference, courses and to undertake other research work etc. as recommended by the department. 
Permission for a duration upto 30 days be sanctioned by the department with an intimation to SPGC and 
more than 30 days by the Chairperson- SPGC on the recommendation of the Department 
7. ACADEMIC REQUIREMENTS  
7.1. Minimum Duration, Maximum Duration and Academic Requirements 
 
The table below lists the minimum duration and maximum duration allowed in the programme, and 
credits requirements for graduation in the various programmes: 
 
"Course Work" includes only postgraduate course credits unless otherwise stated. To satisfy the 
"Minimum Duration" requirements, registration must be over consecutive semesters; exception will be 
made only if the student is on authorized leave. "Maximum Duration" is counted from the student's first 
registration date. SPI/CPI will be calculated on the basis of all permitted courses taken by the student. 
The table below is applicable for Y23 and later batch students. For Y22 and earlier batch 
students, click here. 
 
(24) 
S. 
No. 
Programme 
Minimum 
total credits 
Credits 
through 
course 
work 
(minimum) 
Credits 
through 
research 
(minimum) 
Minimum 
duration1,2 
Maximum 
duration3 
1 
DIIT 
72 
36 
- 
2 sem 
18 months 
2 
M.Tech./ M.Des. (Design, DOMS, 
BSBE, CHE, CSE, ES, NET)# 
144 
54^,@ 
63 
4 sem 
4 years 
3 
M.Tech. (MSP, PSE)# 
144 
63^,@ 
63 
4 sem 
4 years 
4 
M.Tech. (AE, CE, CGS, EE, KSS, 
ME, MSE, SEE, SPASE)# 
144 
72^,@ 
72 
4 sem 
4 years 
5 
M.S. by Research (AE, CE, CHE, 
CSE, EE, PSE) with B.Tech., B.S. (4 
years) or M.Sc. 
144 
 36@ 
72 
4 sem 
4 years 
5 
M.S. by Research (SEE) with 
B.Tech., B.S. (4 years) or M.Sc. 
144 
 54@ 
90 
4 sem 
4 years 
6 
M.S. by Research (ME) with 
B.Tech., B.S. (4 years) or M.Sc. 
144 
45@ 
72 
4 sem 
4 years 
7 
M.S. by Research (CGS) with 
B.Tech., B.S. (4 years) or M.Sc. 
144 
54@ 
72 
4 sem 
4 years 
8 
M.S. by Research (CGS) with 3-
years B.Sc. or Bachelor’s Degree 
216 
72@ 
72 
6 sem 
5 years 
9 
MBA 
216 
216 
- 
4 sem 
3 years 
10 
Ph.D. (CSE, CHE) with B.Tech., 
B.S. (4 years), M.Sc., M.C.A. 
216 
36*,@ 
72 
6 sem 
7 years 
11 
Ph.D. (DOMS, BSBE, IS) with 
B.Tech., B.Arch., B.S. (4 years), 
B.Pharm., B.V.Sc., M.B.B.S, M.Sc., 
M.A., M.Com. Or Chartered 
Accountancy 
PhD (AE, MSP) with B.Tech., B.S. 
(4 years), M.Sc. 
216 
54*,@ 
72 
6 sem 
7 years 
12 
Ph.D. (CGS) with B.Tech., B.S. (4 
years), M.Sc. 
216 
54*,@ 
144 
6 sem 
7 years 
13 
Ph.D. (PSE) with B.Tech., B.S. (4 
years), M.Sc. 
216 
63*,@ 
72 
6 sem 
7 years 
14 
Ph.D. (Design, CE, EE, ECO, HSS, 
ME, MSE, NET, SPASE) with 
B.Des., B.Tech., B.Arch., B.S. (4 
years), M.Sc., M.A., M.Com. Or 
Chartered Accoutancy; Ph.D. (CHM, 
ES, PHY, MTH) with B.Tech/B.S. 
216 
72*,@ 
72 
6 sem 
7 years 
15 
Ph.D. (SEE) with B.Tech., B.S. (4 
years), M.Sc.  
216 
72*,@ 
144 
6 sem 
7 years 
16 
Ph.D. (Design, DOMS, AE, BSBE, 
CE, CHE, CSE, EE, ES, IS, ME, 
MSE, MSP, NET, PSE,) with 
M.Des., M.Tech., or MBA (with 
B.Tech., B.S. (4 years), M.Sc., 
M.A.), M. Pharm, M.D., M.V.Sc 
144 
36*,@ 
72 
4 sem 
6 years 
(25) 
17 
Ph.D. (SEE) with M.Tech., or MBA 
(with B.Tech., B.S. (4 years), M.Sc., 
M.A.) 
198 
54*,@ 
144 
4 sem 
6 years 
18 
Ph.D. (SPASE) with M.Tech. 
144 
54*,@ 
72 
4 sem 
6 years 
19 
Ph.D. (CHM, PHY) with M. Sc., 
Ph.D. (DOMS) with MBA (with 
B.A., B.Sc.) 
180 
36*,@ 
72 
5 sem 
6 years 
20 
Ph.D. (CGS) with M.A., M.Phil., 
Equivalent degree to M.Tech. 
180 
36*,@ 
144 
4 sem 
6 years 
21 
Ph.D. (HSS, MTH, ECO) with M.A., 
M.Phil., Fine-Art or Chartered 
Accountancy; Ph.D. (MTH, ES) with 
M.Sc. 
180 
54*,@ 
72 
5 sem 
6 years 
22 
MSc (CHM, ECO, MTH, PHY, 
STA) 
Refer to 
Annexure 
VII 
Refer to 
Annexure 
VII 
Refer to 
Annexure 
VII 
4 sem 
3 Years 
 
^ 
May include one undergraduate course (permitted by DPGC) 
# 
For M.Tech./ M.Des. (with Project), refer Section 7.9 
@ 
Does not include credits of department specific course on Introduction to Professional and Communication 
(IPC). Additionally, relevant courses on PG seminar and IPC are required for graduation, and will be 
verified by the department. 
* 
This is the minimum requirement specified by the departments. However, DPGC of each department can ask 
any student to do additional course(s) based on his/her background. For the course(s) suggested by DPGC, 
student will be awarded letter grades. For any other additional course(s) taken by the student, he/she may 
make a request for grades to be awarded in the S/X mode. These additional courses may also include UG 
courses with S/X grade. 
1 
Excludes summer term 
2 
Students in the External Registration Programme will be required to stay on the campus at least as long it 
takes to (i) complete the required course work and pass the comprehensive examination (in case of a PhD 
student) and (ii) get a written proposal (prepared in consultation with his/her supervisor and co-supervisor) 
outlining the work proposed to be done for his/her thesis. 
3 
Add an additional year in case of part-time/external students. 
 
A department may prescribe, with prior approval of the SPGC, additional credits of courses/thesis over 
and above the minimum specified in the above table. 
 
7.1.1 All PG students shall be required to pass an English proficiency test or complete a remedial course 
successfully in the partial fulfillment of their PG program. The students in MBA, DIIT, MSc and MSPD 
programs or with IELTS/TOEFL/GATE-English scores above a specified threshold will be exempted 
from this requirement. The students must appear in the English proficiency test in the first semester of 
their program and clear the test in the first academic year of their joining. The remedial course will be 
counted towards the semester load, but not towards the minimum credit requirements for graduation. 
This is applicable for Y23 and later batch students. 
 
7.1.2 Except for MSc students, all PG students shall register for a zero-credit PG Seminar Course, at 
least for one semester for M.Tech./M.Des/ MS by Research/MBA and two semesters for Ph.D. students. 
This is applicable for Y23 and later batch students. 
 
7.1.3 All Ph.D. students shall register for a professional and communication skills course as per their 
departmental template. This is applicable for Y23 and later batch students. 
 
(26) 
7.1.4 For sponsored PhD (working professionals), who have returned to their parent organization after 
completion of courses, Departments/lDPs are allowed to conduct the PG Seminar/professional and 
communication skills courses in the modes other than offline. This is applicable for Y23 and later batch 
students. 
 
7.2. Extension of Programme  
 
1. No student who has completed the prescribed maximum duration in the programme shall be allowed 
to register in the subsequent semester unless he/she has been granted extension of the programme by the 
Senate on the recommendations of the DPGC and the SPGC.  
2. However, those Ph.D. students who have submitted their theses and are waiting for the defence will 
be treated automatically as registered unless they apply for leave. 
 
7.3. Audit Courses  
 
The students are permitted to audit courses, but such courses shall not be shown either on the 
registration form or on the grade transcript.  
 
7.4. Advance Standing at IITK  
On the recommendation of the DPGC and approval of the SPGC, a student admitted to a postgraduate 
programme after partial completion of such or similar programme elsewhere may be granted an 
exemption up to 50 percent of the minimum course credits requirements. A Ph.D. student who has 
completed the two year M.Sc. programme at this institute can transfer a maximum of 18 postgraduate 
course credits earned during the M.Sc. programme towards fulfillment of his/her course requirement for 
the Ph.D. programme on the recommendation of the DPGC and approval of the SPGC, provided these 
credits were in excess of the minimum requirement for earning the M.Sc. degree.  
7.5. Residence Outside IITK  
Students registered in the postgraduate programmes may count for residence and credit requirements, 
research or field work undertaken outside the institute under the supervision of the Institute 
supervisor(s), if facilities for such work are not available at this institute. Such cases must be 
recommended by the DPGC and approved by the SPGC before the student proceeds to the place of 
assignment. The D.IIT. students will not be allowed to count research undertaken outside the institute 
for residence and credit requirements. 
7.6. Credits, Grades, Semester and Cumulative Performance Index  
7.6.1. In each course a student is registered, he/she earns certain approved credits and is awarded a letter 
grade indicating his/her overall performance in that course. There are ten letter grades: A*, A, B+, 
B, C+, C, D+. D, E, F, S, X and I. The correspondence between grades and points (on a 10-point 
scale)/rating is given below: 
 
 A*: 10     A: 10     B+: 9     B: 8    C+: 7     C: 6    D+: 5     D: 4    E: 0    F: 0 
S: Satisfactory  X: Unsatisfactory  I: Incomplete  
7.6.2. If a student does not complete all the requirements for a course for a genuine reason, the instructor 
may award grade I (Incomplete). An I grade must be converted by the instructor to a regular letter 
grade by the last date for such conversion specified in the Academic Calendar, failing which it is 
automatically converted to an F grade.  
(27) 
7.6.3.  A student getting an E , F or X grade in a course must either repeat it or substitute it by another 
course as suggested by DPGC.  
7.6.4.  A student getting a D/D+ grade in a course may be allowed to repeat it or substitute it by another 
course, provided that:  
 
his/her CPI is less than the prescribed minimum and the student is allowed to continue in the 
programme (as per provisions of Section 7.7), or the repetition/substitution is for a maximum of 
one course in the programme such that it does not lead to any increase in the semester load. 
 
 In case a course is repeated or substituted, the old grade will also appear on the transcript although 
it will not be taken into account while computing the CPI/SPI.  
7.6.5.  Seminars will be graded as satisfactory (S) or unsatisfactory (X) and will carry zero credits.  
7.6.6. A student earns 9 credits for each D.IIT, M.Tech., M.Des., M.S. by Research, Ph.D project/thesis 
unit he/she is registered for in a semester. The grade S or X will be awarded for project/thesis 
credits as follows: 
 
 
 At the end of the semester, the project/thesis supervisors(s) will assess the student’s progress 
towards the project/thesis work during the semester and will award the grade S for each unit if the 
work is satisfactory and a X for every unsatisfactory unit. Thus a student registered for 36 credits 
can get one of the following five combinations SSSS, SSSX, SSXX, SXXX, XXXX.  
 
Format for the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/Ph.D. thesis grades in student’s transcripts 
 
Thesis Units 
Thesis Credits 
Grading Options 
4 
36 
4S, 3S1X, 2S2X, 1S3X, 4X 
3 
27 
3S, 2S1X, 1S2X, 3X 
2 
18 
2S, 1S1X, 2X 
1 
09 
1S, 1X 
0 
0 
0S, 0X 
7.6.7.  If a student is on leave for a part of the semester or submits his/her thesis in the middle of a 
semester, the SPGC may reduce his/her thesis/ project credits appropriately. However, under 
exceptional circumstances and for outstanding students, such reduction in thesis credits may be 
waived, on the case-to-case basis, due to the submission of thesis within two weeks before the 
start of the end-semester examinations.  
7.6.8. Computation of the Semester Performance Index (SPI) and Cumulative Performance Index (CPI)  
The SPI is an indicator of the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses he/she has 
registered during a given semester. It is computed as follows: If the grades awarded to a student are G1, 
G2 etc in courses with corresponding credits C1, C2 etc, the SPI is given by 
 
SPI = (C1G1 + C2 G2 + …) / (C1 + C2 + …) 
 
 In the above computation, courses with S and X grades are ignored. Similarly, the CPI indicates the 
cumulative academic performance in all the courses taken including those taken in the current semester. 
 
7.6.9. It is mandatory to conduct End Semester Examination in a course, unless the instructor has 
already informed DPGC(s) of the department(s) offering the course as well as students registered in the 
course at the beginning of the course. If a student fails to appear in the End Semester Examination of a 
course for medical reasons, s/he may submit a request for make-up examination in the prescribed form 
(28) 
for the approval of Chairperson, SPGC after recommendation from the DPGC of the department 
concerned. A passing grade cannot be awarded, if a student fails to appear in the End Semester 
Examination or Make-up Examination of a course. However, in such a scenario, an appropriate grade 
based on zero marks in the End-Semester Examination may be awarded only after the recommendation 
of SPGC and approval of Chairperson, Senate.  
 
If a student fails to appear in the Mid Semester Examination of a course for medical reasons, s/he may 
apply for make-up examination on the dates of such examinations for the modular courses. For the 
approved cases, the course instructor may opt to prorate marks in the mid-semester examination. 
7.7. Academic Performance Requirement  
The academic performance of each PG student will be reviewed by the Academic Performance 
Evaluation Committee (APEC) at the end of each regular semester. 
7.7.1. The minimum CPI requirement for continuing in the programme or for graduation is given below. 
D.IIT./M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research/MBA programme :  
6.0. 
Ph.D. programme :  
 
 
 
 
 
6.5.  
An M.Sc. student has to complete prescribed number of credits for graduation. 
7.7.2. A student will normally not be allowed to continue in the D.IIT./M.Tech./ M.Des./M.S. by 
Research /MBA programme if 
i) his/her CPI is below 6.0 
ii) he/she obtains two Fs or two Es or one F and one E in the same or different courses. 
iii) he/she accumulates three or more Xs towards thesis grades.  
 
7.7.3. A student will normally not be allowed to continue in the Ph.D. programme if 
i) his/her CPI is below 6.5 
ii) he/she obtains two Fs or two Es or one F and one E in the same or different courses.  
iii) he/she accumulates eight or more Xs towards thesis grades. 
iv) he/she accumulates six or more Xs towards thesis grades in two consecutive semesters. 
v) he/she secures Xs in all the thesis credits registered for in two consecutive semesters.  
7.7.4. For students whose programme should be terminated due to academic deficiency, based on PG-
APEC report, a show-cause notice for potential termination shall be issued by the respective Convener, 
DPGC, after authorization from the SPGC. The SPGC, shall take the final decisions of continuation in 
the program in such cases, on a case-by-case basis, considering the written and clearly argued response 
to the show-cause notice by the student, along with recommendations of the concerned DPGC and 
Counselling Service. 
 
In a case in which the SPGC is not satisfied or is unable to take a view on the response of the student to 
the show-cause notice, the SPGC will forward the case along with the response of the student to the 
Senate for possible termination. If the Senate decides to terminate the concerned student's programme, 
the Head of the concerned Department will issue the letter of termination. 
 
7.7.5. There is a provision for a student who is terminated from her/his program to appeal as well as re-
appeal for reinstatement of the program. Appeals, if any, should be addressed to Chairman, Senate, IIT 
Kanpur. Appeal should be neatly written or typed on A4-size paper. 
 
(29) 
If a student's appeal is turned down by the Senate, the student may re-appeal after a gap of a few 
(typically 3 or 4) months until two years from the date of termination. If reinstated, such candidates are 
required to fulfil all the programme-specific requirements without exceeding the maximum duration, 
from the first date of registration, as per the Table given in Section 7.l. The reappeal needs to be justified 
with valid reasons/documents. The Admittance Committee can consider the re-appeal, and upon 
acceptance, the due procedure for further processing of re-appeal begins. Students will only get one 
chance for a re-appeal. 
 
7.7.6. In the case of M.Sc. students, clauses 7.7.1 to 7.7.5 shall not apply. An M.Sc. student has to only 
complete prescribed number of credits as per department template (Annexure VII) for graduation. Such 
students will be counselled by the ACG (Academic Counselling & Guidance) in case their CAR score 
falls below 40, where CAR represents the total credits divided by the number of semesters student 
registered excluding the summer term. 
7.8. Exit from Ph.D. Programme 
7.8.1 If a Ph.D. student in an engineering department does not hold a master’s degree in engineering, 
he/she may exit from the programme with an M.Tech. degree provided  
(i)  
a request to this effect is made not before the student has completed two-and-half years (excluding 
the period of sanctioned leave, if any) in the programme; 
(ii) 
the request is approved by the Senate on the recommendations of DPGC and SPGC; and 
(iii)   the student has completed all the requirements of the M.Tech. degree (including a thesis).  
7.8.2 If a Ph.D. student is in an engineering department and holds a master’s degree in engineering or if 
the Ph.D. student is in a non-engineering department, he/she may request with proper justification to exit 
from the programme with a degree/diploma as per the department template (details can be seen here). 
The request has to be recommended by the thesis supervisor, DPGC and SPGC and approved by the 
Senate. The student should fulfil all the requirements for the exit degree/diploma, including any 
thesis/project requirement, for graduating with the exit degree/diploma. 
 
7.8.3 Students who joined Masters’ program (M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research) and converted into 
PhD program can exercise the exit option any time after the accumulation of the requisite number of 
overall credits for the award of the masters’ degree.  
 
7.8.4 For MBA programme kindly refer to Annexure-V. 
 
7.8.5 The Masters' thesis, wherever applicable, should be submitted within six months of the approval of 
the exit option by the Senate. Under exceptional circumstances, this period can be extended for three 
more months by the SPGC on the recommendation of DPGC for bonafide reasons. If the thesis is not 
submitted within the desired period including the extension, the exit option from PhD programme will 
stand cancelled and the student’s program will be terminated. 
 
7.9 Transfer from M.Tech./ M.Des. to M.Tech./ M. Des. (with project) 
 
A M.Tech./ M.Des. student may transfer from his/her programme to M.Tech./ M.Des. (with project) on 
a clear recommendation of his/her thesis supervisor at the beginning of his/her 3rd semester. The request 
for exercising this option shall be made by the student to the DPGC of the concerned department, which 
is then approved by SPGC. Under this transfer, 
 
(a) the student shall complete 36 additional credits in course work beyond the minimum M.Tech./ 
M.Des. course work requirement and a minimum of 36 credits in research (with the minimum total 
credit requirement for graduation being 144 credits), and 
(30) 
(b) the student shall submit a project report instead of thesis. The transcript for the M.Tech./ M.Des. 
(with project) degree shall include the annotation: "M.Tech./ M.Des. (with project) degree is awarded 
based on a project report that did not amount to a full thesis". 
 
Note: Y23 and earlier batch M.Tech./ M.Des. students may exit with the MTech./ M.Des. (with project) 
degree after 20 months in their M.Tech./ M.Des. programme upon the recommendation of thesis 
supervisor and DPGC and approval of SPGC. They are exempted from the additional coursework 
requirement. 
7.10. Withdrawal from Programme 
A postgraduate student may withdraw anytime from his/her academic programme, provided he/she 
makes a written request to this effect, and his/her request is endorsed by DPGC and approved by SPGC. 
A letter of withdrawal will be issued by the Head of the Department/IDP of the student. 
8. Comprehensive Examination of PhD Student 
8.1. Students registered in the Ph.D. programme must pass a comprehensive examination designed to 
test the overall comprehension of the student in the various subjects. A student can appear in the 
comprehensive examination only after he/she has completed the course requirements and satisfied the 
minimum specified CPI requirement. 
8.2. All PhD students must pass the comprehensive examination within four months of completing the 
minimum credits through coursework. For a well merited case, this period can be extended for two more 
months by the SPGC on the recommendation of DPGC. However, in no case, the date of passing the 
comprehensive examination should go beyond four semesters after the first registration. The above time 
limits are exclusive of the period of sanctioned semester leave, if any. 
8.3. The examination will be in oral form but may be supplemented with a written part. 
8.4. The comprehensive examination board will consist of at least three but not more than five faculty 
members of the student's department/IDP plus one faculty member from outside the department/IDP 
(discipline, in the case of Humanities & Social Sciences). There may be two faculty members from 
outside the department/IDP (discipline, in the case of Humanities & Social Sciences) in case thesis 
supervisor is from outside the department/IDP (discipline, in the case of Humanities & Social Sciences). 
Constitution of the board will be proposed by the DPGC in consultation with the Head of the 
department/IDP and the thesis supervisor, if already assigned, and will be forwarded to the Chairperson, 
SPGC who will send it to the Chairman, Senate for approval. The thesis supervisor of the student, if 
already assigned, will be the convener of the board. In case no thesis supervisor is assigned, the 
Convener, DPGC will be the convener of the board. 
8.5. A student will be considered to have passed the comprehensive examination if all except at the most 
one member of the board are satisfied with student's performance in the examination. The report of the 
comprehensive examination must be sent to the Chairperson, SPGC within 8 weeks of the date of 
approval of the board.  
8.6. When a student has not passed the comprehensive examination in his/her first attempt, a second 
comprehensive examination will be conducted by the same board that was constituted earlier unless 
otherwise approved by the Chairman, Senate on the recommendation of the DPGC and the SPGC. A 
student will not be allowed to appear in the comprehensive examination more than twice. A letter of 
warning will be issued by the department to the student that failing to clear the above exams, after the 
natural deadline and with no extension request, within the stipulated time (typically six months after the 
deadline) will result in termination of the PhD program. 
(31) 
9. Candidacy for the Ph.D. Degree 
A student enrolled in the Ph.D. programme is formally admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D. degree 
after he/she has completed the course requirements for the degree with at least the minimum required 
CPI, and has passed the comprehensive examination. Only such students who are admitted to the 
candidacy will be allowed to submit Ph.D. theses in accordance with the guidelines laid down in Section 
11.5.2. 
10. State of Art Seminar 
Every Ph.D. student admitted to the candidacy for the Ph.D. degree is required to give a general seminar 
in the Department covering the State of Art of the area of research. This seminar must be given within 
six months of passing the comprehensive examination. A report of satisfactory completion of this 
requirement is to be communicated to Chairperson, SPGC by the thesis supervisor through the 
Convener, DPGC.  
If a student fails to successfully deliver the SOTA seminar within the stipulated 6 months, then on the 
request of the student and recommendation from the thesis supervisor and Convener, DPGC, the 
Chairman, SPGC may grant an extension up to three months, while a further extension up to three 
months may be granted by SPGC. The student has to apply for these extensions in advance. A letter of 
warning will be issued by the department to the student that failing to clear the above exams, after the 
natural deadline and with no extension request, within the stipulated time (typically six months after the 
deadline) will result in termination of the PhD program. 
11. Thesis and Thesis Examination 
11.1. Appointment of Thesis Supervisors of D.IIT., M Tech., MS by Research, M. Des. and Ph.D. 
Students  
11.1.1. A student shall not normally have more than two supervisors at any given time.  
11.1.2. Thesis supervisor(s) of a student will normally be appointed from amongst the faculty members 
at IIT Kanpur using modalities decided by the departments. However, for a M.S. by Research student 
who is a project employee at IIT Kanpur, the faculty member who is the principal investigator of the 
project will be appointed as his/her thesis supervisor. 
11.1.3. Under exceptional circumstances, other employees of IITK with the rank of senior scientific 
officer and above and faculty fellows can be appointed as co-supervisors of PG students. The 
recommendation of a peer group (appointed by the Head of the Department to which the student 
belongs) regarding the merit and qualifications of being considered as co-supervisor should be sent to 
the SPGC through the DPGC for approval.  
11.1.4. In exceptional cases a student can have a co-supervisor from outside the institute on the 
recommendation of the DPGC and the SPGC and approval of the Chairman, Senate. Application along 
with biodata/CV of external co-supervisor needs to be attached. 
11.1.5. The appointment or change of supervisor(s) will be communicated to the SPGC by the DPGC. 
No change/addition of supervisor(s) is allowed after the thesis has been submitted.  
11.1.6. In case there has been a change/addition in the supervisor(s), the M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by 
Research thesis will not be submitted earlier than three months and the Ph.D. thesis will not be 
submitted earlier then six months from the date of such change.  
(32) 
11.1.7. If a student’s supervisor proceeds on long leave for more than one year in case of Ph.D. students, 
and on leave for more than three months in case of M.Tech./M.Des. /M.S. by Research students, the 
DPGC shall appoint a supervisor or a co-supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the student. 
In such a case the number of supervisors may be more than two if an external supervisor already exists. 
If a student’s supervisor proceeds on leave for not more than one year in case of Ph.D. students, and not 
more than three months in case of M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research students, the DPGC may appoint a 
programme coordinator to take care of various formalities.  
11.1.8. If all research work and related analysis is complete except writing of the thesis, and the 
supervisor proposes to go on leave, the DPGC may appoint a programme coordinator, to take care of the 
formalities, such as providing the list of examiners, conducting the oral examination, etc.  
11.1.9. In case a supervisor ceases to be a faculty member of the institute, the DPGC will appoint a new 
supervisor or co-supervisor, while the existing supervisor may be appointed as co-supervisor from 
outside the Institute for ease and continuity of the student's research. However, if the thesis is nearly 
complete and only routine formalities concerning the evaluation remain, the DPGC may appoint a 
programme coordinator. 
11.2 Doctoral Monitoring Committee (DMC) 
A Doctoral Monitoring Committee shall be formed for all PhD students at the time of the formal 
admittance to the candidacy for the Ph.D. degree. The DMC for each PhD student should comprise of 
his/her supervisor(s) and two more faculty members of the Institute. As far as possible, the subsequent 
committees for the PhD students should include all DMC members. 
The members of the DMC shall meet the student once a year to monitor the progress of the student’s 
thesis, and the supervisor shall submit a report of the student’s progress to the PG Office on behalf of 
the DMC, by the deadline specified in the academic calendar. This will be required for the student to 
pre-register for the next semester. After the 5th year of the PhD programme of the student, DMC report 
is to be submitted every semester. The format of DMC report is given in Annexure VIII. 
11.3. Open Seminar of Ph.D. Students  
Before proceeding to finalize the thesis, each Ph.D. student must deliver a seminar open to faculty and 
students in which the research work will be presented to obtain comments and criticism which may be 
incorporated in his/her thesis. Notice of the seminar must be displayed at least four days in advance. A 
thesis can be submitted only after the satisfactory fulfillment of this requirement. The intimation that the 
open seminar has been given should be communicated by the thesis supervisor through the Convener, 
DPGC to the Academic Section. 
The maximum time duration for the submission of the thesis after the delivery of the open seminar will 
be six months. In exceptional circumstances, the students may seek an extension up to three months with 
proper justification. However, if the thesis is not submitted within the desired period including the 
extension, the open seminar already delivered will stand cancelled and the student will be required to 
give a fresh open seminar before he/she submits his/her thesis.  
11.4. Constitution of Committee/Board for Thesis and Oral Examination  
11.4.1. M Tech/M Des/ MS by Research and D.IIT. Project Oral Examination Committee 
(33) 
11.4.1.1. The thesis/project will be examined by an oral examination committee formed by the thesis 
supervisor(s)/programme coordinator in consultation with the Head of the Department/IDP. It must be 
recommended by the DPGC and approved by the Chairperson, SPGC.  
11.4.1.2. The committee shall consist of the thesis supervisor(s)/ programme coordinator and at least 
two but not more than four other members, one of whom should belong to a department/IDP other than 
the student's department/IDP. The thesis supervisor/programme coordinator will act as the Convener of 
the Committee. 
11.4.2. Ph.D. Thesis Board 
11.4.2.1. The thesis board shall consist of three members in addition to the thesis supervisor(s) and 
should be approved by the Chairman, Senate. Unless some special circumstances make it impractical, at 
least two members of the thesis board (other than the supervisor(s)) must be from outside the Institute 
and at least one of these two must be from within the country.  
11.4.2.2. The procedure for constituting the thesis board is given below.  
i) The thesis board may be proposed at the most 4 weeks before the submission of the thesis.  
ii) The thesis supervisor(s)/programme coordinator, in consultation with the Head of the Department 
shall propose a list of examiners (in addition to the thesis supervisor(s)/programme coordinator) 
consisting of at least three extra names over and above the required number of members for the thesis 
board. This list along with adequate number of copies of synopsis (prepared according to the format 
prescribed in Specification and Information Regarding the Preparation of Thesis) shall be forwarded by 
the DPGC to Chairperson, SPGC.  
iii) The Chairman, Senate in consultation with Chairperson, SPGC will select the members of the thesis 
board from this list. If considered necessary, the Chairman, Senate may require additional names of 
experts to be submitted. In case Chairman, Senate is the supervisor/co-supervisor of the student 
concerned, Chairperson, SPGC will select the members of the thesis board. In case Chairperson, SPGC 
is the supervisor of the student concerned, Chairman, Senate may consult Chairperson, SUGC for the 
selection of the thesis board. 
iv) The names of the members of the thesis board shall be kept confidential till successful completion of 
the oral examination. However, on completion of Ph.D. thesis evaluation (as detailed in Section 11.6.2), 
the Academic Section will send to the thesis supervisor(s) the names of the institute faculty who are the 
members of the thesis board, as well as that member who is from outside the institute but is from within 
the country so that these names can be included in the proposed list of the members of oral board. 
11.4.3. Ph.D. Oral Board 
11.4.3.1. The oral board shall consist of four members in addition to the thesis supervisor(s)/programme 
coordinator. Of the four, three shall be from among the faculty members of the institute (including those, 
if any, on the thesis board) and one shall be from among the members of the thesis board within the 
country but outside the institute. Of the three members from IIT Kanpur at least one shall be from a 
department or IDP (or discipline in case of Humanities and Social Sciences) which is different from the 
student's own.  
11.4.3.2. The thesis supervisor(s)/programme coordinator in consultation with the Head of the 
Department shall propose the constitution of the oral board (forwarded through the Convener, DPGC) to 
the Chairperson, SPGC who will forward it to the Chairman, Senate for approval.  
(34) 
11.5. Submission of Thesis/Project  
Keeping in view the ideal of maintaining the highest standards and integrity of research output from 
IITK, all the thesis/project report submitted to the institute should follow the guidelines provided in 
https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf . In particular, the following measures are necessarily 
required to be followed: 
 
(a) The thesis should contain a signed “Declaration” by the student about the work to be plagiarism 
free. The “Declaration” is available in the link https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf 
 
(b) The student must submit a signed “Certificate” to be kept in the student file. The “Certificate” is 
also available in the link https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf 
 
(c) Soft copy of the thesis is subjected to a plagiarism check by Plagiarism Prevention Desk (PPD). 
Only if the similarity index using one of the similarity checkers is below a minimum threshold of 
10% or the supervisor certifies that the index cannot be meaningfully reduced below 10%, a 
clearance form will be issued by the DOAA office. No thesis will be allowed to be submitted 
without 
this 
clearance 
form. 
Detailed 
procedure 
is 
again 
available 
in 
the 
link 
https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf 
 
(d) The thesis must follow the Institute recommended formatting guidelines, with particular adherence 
to consistency across the entire thesis. Detailed guidelines for the same are available in the link 
https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf 
11.5.1. M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. by Research Thesis/ D.IIT. Project 
After the M.Tech./M.Des./D.IIT. oral examination committee has been constituted, one soft copy of the 
thesis/project 
report 
prepared 
according 
to 
the 
format 
prescribed 
in 
the 
link 
https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf, will be submitted on thesis submission portal only after 
the approval of oral examination committee at least a week before the probable date of oral examination. 
The Academic Section will arrange to send the copies of the thesis to the examiners over email.  
11.5.2. Ph.D. Thesis 
Ph.D. thesis can be submitted only after the thesis board has been duly approved and the intimation of 
the satisfactory completion of the open seminar has been received. One soft copy of the Ph.D. thesis 
prepared according to the format prescribed in the link https://www.iitk.ac.in/doaa/data/thesisguide.pdf 
should be submitted. 
11.6. Processing of Project/Thesis  
11.6.1. M Tech/M.Des./M.S. by Research/D.IIT. Oral Examination 
11.6.1.1. The M.Tech / M.Des. / M.S. by Research / D.IIT. oral examination will be conducted within 
four months from the date of submission of the thesis/project. If a student does not appear in the oral 
examination within this time period, his/her programme would be deemed to have been terminated. 
Request for reinstatement in the programme by such a student should be addressed to the Chairman, 
Senate. The request may be considered by the Senate and in case the Senate grants the request it shall 
specify the requirements that the student must fulfill for the award of the degree.  
11.6.1.2. The thesis supervisor/programme coordinator will intimate the date of the oral examination to 
the Academic Section.  
(35) 
11.6.1.3. The oral examination committee will evaluate the thesis/project, conduct the oral examination, 
and send a report of the examination to the Chairperson, SPGC through the Convener, DPGC. In the 
case of a thesis, this committee will also provide in its report an overall rating of the thesis as Excellent, 
Good, or Satisfactory, with a brief justification regarding student's contributions. This rating of the 
thesis will be reported to the Senate. 
11.6.1.4. A thesis will be considered to have been accepted if all members of the oral examination 
committee recommend its acceptance. A thesis, which is not accepted, will be considered to have been 
rejected.  
11.6.1.5. If a thesis is rejected along with a recommendation for resubmission after incorporating any 
modification/correction suggested by the oral examination committee, oral examination of the re-
submitted thesis/project will be conducted by the original committee unless a different committee is 
approved by the Chairperson, SPGC. If the re-submitted thesis is rejected, the matter will be reported to 
the Senate for appropriate action.  
11.6.1.6. Acceptance of thesis/project will be reported to the Senate for approval.  
11.6.2. Ph.D. Thesis Evaluation by the Thesis Board 
 
11.6.2.1. After the synopsis has been submitted and the thesis board constituted, the 
Dean/Associate Dean of Academic Affairs will send a letter by e-mail/fax to each member of 
the thesis board enclosing a copy of the synopsis and requesting him/her to serve as an 
examiner for the thesis. If the examiner refuses or no response is received for four weeks (with 
a reminder being sent after two weeks), then steps will be taken to appoint another examiner. 
 
11.6.2.2. On receipt of the acceptance of examinership, a soft copy of the thesis along with a thesis 
evaluation form for the examiner's report will be sent to each examiner. 
11.6.2.3. In case Dean/Associate Dean of Academic Affairs is the supervisor of the student concerned, 
above processing (detailed in paras 1 and 2) will be done by the Associate Dean/Dean of Academic 
Affairs. In the exception case of both Dean/Associate Dean of Academic Affairs being the supervisor(s) 
of the concerned student, the above processing will be handled by the Dean of Faculty Affairs. 
11.6.2.4. When an examiner's report is received, the Chairperson, SPGC will place it in one of the 
following three categories: 
i) Category I: If an examiner suggests corrections regarding punctuation, grammar, spelling or language, 
the supervisor(s) can use their discretion regarding incorporation of such suggestions.  
ii) Category II: If an examiner points out typographical errors other than those in (i) above, or minor 
technical mistakes, raises some queries or suggests modifications but does not imply that the acceptance 
of the thesis is subject to removal of these defects to the examiner's satisfaction, the supervisor will 
communicate to the Chairperson, SPGC the student's response to the above and the same will be 
incorporated in the thesis to the satisfaction of the oral board, and examiner(s) concerned should be 
informed of the changes made on the basis of his/her suggestions.  
iii) Category III: If an examiner outright rejects the thesis or raises technical points or suggests 
modifications which must be answered/carried out to the examiner's satisfaction before the thesis is 
accepted, the supervisor will communicate to the Chairperson, SPGC the changes made in the thesis, if 
any, in response to the examiner's comments along with an explanatory note which will be sent to the 
examiner with a request to respond within two weeks; if the examiner's response is not received within 
(36) 
this period, a reminder will be sent and if no reply is received within two weeks time, further action will 
be initiated by the Chairperson, SPGC.  
11.6.2.5. Copies of the categorized report (without the identity of the examiner) will be sent to the thesis 
supervisor(s), Student, DPGC-Convenor and the Head of the Department. 
11.6.2.6. On receipt of two positive reports (Category I or II), the third reviewer is given a final deadline 
to submit his/her report. This deadline will be two weeks from the receipt of the second positive report 
or the original deadline whichever is later. If the third report is not received within this deadline, 
permission is sought from Chairperson, SPGC to proceed forward with two reports. On the grant of this 
permission, the subsequent steps are initiated. However, Chairperson, SPGC may ask to wait for the 
third report based on his assessment of the comments raised in the existing reports. 
11.6.2.7. Irrespective of the category marked in clause 11.6.2.4, the student through the supervisor 
submits a “response to referee comments” along with a soft copy of the revised thesis clearly 
highlighting the revisions incorporated (e.g. in different font colors for each of the examiner). 
11.6.2.8. On completion of the process detailed above, the Chairperson, SPGC will intimate the 
supervisor the concurrence of the Chairman, Senate, if given, to initiate the constitution of the oral 
board. This concurrence of Chairman, Senate will be given if all the examiners recommend acceptance 
of the thesis. If one of the examiners rejects the thesis, the matter will be referred to Chairman, Senate 
for deciding further course of action. If two or more examiners reject the thesis, the thesis will be 
rejected. 
11.6.2.9. In case Chairperson, SPGC is the supervisor of the student concerned, the above processing 
(detailed in paras 11.6.2.4, 11.6.2.5, 11.6.2.6 and 11.6.2.8) will be done by Chairperson, SUGC. 
11.6.3. Ph.D. Oral Examination 
11.6.3.1. The Ph.D. oral examination will be an open examination. The supervisor(s)/programme 
coordinator will be the convener of the oral board and will fix the date of the oral examination and 
intimate the date to the Academic Section. 
 
11.6.3.2. If a member of the oral board communicates his/her inability to be present in advance or fails 
to be present on the specified date and time, the Chairman, Senate may appoint a substitute in 
consultation with the thesis supervisor(s)/programme coordinator, Head of the department and 
Chairperson, SPGC. 
 
11.6.3.3. Each member of the oral board will be given a soft copy of the thesis along with the entire 
technical correspondence with the thesis examiners at least one week before the date of the oral 
examination. This includes a copy of the report of the thesis examiners (without the identity of the 
examiner), a soft copy of the highlighted revised thesis and “response to referee comments”. 
 
11.6.3.4. The oral board shall 
 
i) 
examine the thesis reports, 
ii) examine if necessary modifications suggested by the thesis examiners have been incorporated, 
iii)  elicit the candidate's replies to the questions raised by the thesis examiners, 
iv)  authenticate the work as the student's own, 
v)  judge if the presentation of the work by the student and the answers to the questions asked have 
been satisfactory, and  
vi)  give a report of the examination, which will be communicated by the supervisor(s)/programme 
coordinator to the Chairperson, SPGC through the Convener, DPGC.  
(37) 
 
11.6.3.5. If all, except at most one member, declare the student as passed, the student shall be deemed to 
have passed. 
 
11.6.3.6. If a candidate has not passed, the oral board will specify whether 
 
i) 
the candidate may be given another chance to appear in the oral examination and will specify the 
approximate date for re-examination. The original oral board will conduct the re-examination 
unless a different oral board is approved by the Chairman, Senate. In the re-examination, the board 
will declare whether the student has passed or failed as per the criteria laid down above but will not 
recommend holding a third oral examination. 
ii) the candidate is declared to have failed.  
 
11.6.3.7. On receipt of the report that the student has passed the oral examination, the Chairperson, 
SPGC will recommend to the Senate for award of the Ph.D. degree. 
 
11.6.3.8. If the candidate has failed, the matter will be brought to the attention of the Senate for further 
action. 
 
11.7 Award of M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. (by Research)/M.B.A. degree with Ph.D. degree  
 
All students who are pursuing the Ph.D. degree directly after B.Tech./B.S. (4 year)/M.Sc. degree can get 
an additional M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. (by Research)/M.B.A. degree awarded along with the Ph.D. degree 
at the time of graduation, provided following conditions are satisfied:  
1.  The minimum total credit requirement will be 216.  
2.  The minimum number of thesis credits will be the sum of specified minimum number of thesis 
credits for M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. (by Research) and specified minimum number of thesis credits for 
Ph.D.  
3.  The minimum number of course credits will be the maximum of C1 and C2, where C1 is the course 
credits required for M.Tech./M.Des./M.S. (by Research)/M.B.A. and C2 is the course credits 
required for Ph.D. after B.Tech./B.S./M.Sc. in the Department/IDP concerned. Refer Annexure IV 
for more details.  
4.  Except in the case of M.S. (by Research) where a thesis will be required and M.B.A. where 
additional number of courses will be required, the student will have the option to either submit a 
thesis or credit an additional number of courses in consultation with thesis supervisor and on the 
recommendation of the DPGC of the Department/IDP. The additional coursework would be for a 
minimum of 63 credits. The minimum number of thesis credits in such cases will be reduced by 63 
credits.  
5.  In case a thesis is submitted, the problem which forms the major content of the thesis should be 
different from that reported in the Ph.D. thesis. To ensure this, plagiarism check should be 
performed between the M.S. (by Research)/M.Tech./M.Des. thesis and the PhD thesis. Also, it is 
recommended that at least one member should be common in the two thesis oral boards. 
6.  In case a thesis is submitted, open seminar can be delivered any time after the thesis defense.  
 
 
 
12. GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS  
(38) 
A student shall be deemed to have completed the graduation requirements., if the student has  
i) 
passed all the prescribed courses,  
ii)  
attained the minimum required CPI,  
iii)  
satisfied the minimum academic and duration requirements,.  
iv)  
satisfied all the requirements specified by the concerned department, if any,  
v)  
satisfied all the requirements specified by the Senate and the Ordinances..  
In addition, the student should have paid all the dues to the Institute and, should have no pending case of 
indiscipline.  
(39) 
 
ANNEXURE I  
 
POSTGRADUATE COMMITTEES  
The Senate Postgraduate Committee (SPGC) shall consist of one representative from each of the 
academic departments/interdisciplinary programmes who must be the Convener of DPGC and six 
additional members of whom one shall be the outgoing Chairperson (if not otherwise a member) and 
four shall be students, two each from Ph.D. and M.Tech./M.S. by Research programmes and nominated 
for the purpose by the Students Senate. The Convenors of DPGCs are recommended to have 2-year 
terms. 
The Postgraduate Committee shall have jurisdiction in the following matters concerning the 
postgraduate programme of the Institute: the formal approval of new courses of instruction, modification 
of courses already approved, the credit value of courses, the formal approval of admission of 
postgraduate students, the admission of qualified students to candidacy for degrees, the rules governing 
the form of presentation and disposal of theses, the conduct of oral and written examinations and in 
such other related matters as may be referred to it by the Senate. Refer Annexure III for details on 
course number, credits, approval and discontinuation of courses. 
The functions of the Committee shall consist primarily of general policy determination, coordination 
and review, but the Senate shall retain the power of final review. In the discharge of its responsibilities 
the committee shall make full use of the appraisals and recommendations of the various academic 
departments concerned. This committee shall be assisted by the Departmental Postgraduate Committees.  
Each department/interdisciplinary programme (approved by the Senate) shall have a Departmental 
Postgraduate Committee consisting of a Convener to be nominated by the Head of Department in 
consultation with the faculty of the department, the Head of the Department and a minimum of four and 
a maximum of eight faculty members to be chosen by the Department, and two students, one from the 
Ph D and the other from the M.Tech./M.S. by Research programme. If an M.Tech./M.S. by Research 
programme does not exist, both shall be from the Ph.D. programme. The student members shall be 
chosen by the postgraduate students of the department for a period of one year. Tenure of the faculty 
members shall be two years, half of them retiring each year. 
The DPGC student members must participate in all DPGC meetings, and their opinion shall be sought, 
except for admission related matters or conduct of oral and written exams. In case of conflict of interest, 
the DPGC member should recuse from the meeting and be replaced with another faculty/student 
member, as applicable.  
The SPGC shall be assisted by a standing sub-committee called as Post-Graduate Academic 
Performance Evaluation Committee (PG-APEC). The Chairperson of SPGC shall nominate the 
Chairperson of PG-APEC, who shall, in consultation with the SPGC Chairperson, constitute the PG-
APEC consisting of five faculty members drawn from amongst the SPGC members. The APEC shall 
review the academic performances of all post-graduate students at the end of each semester and will 
make its recommendations to the SPGC regarding the academically deficient students. 
(40) 
 
ANNEXURE II  
 
RESERVATION OF SEATS  
SC/ST Category 
In each programme 15 percent seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes (SC) candidates and 7.5 
percent seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes (ST) candidates. Such candidates are required to 
produce at the time of admission an original certificate in the prescribed format of Government of India, 
which is amended from time to time. The currently prevailing format is given in Annexure II.1.  
OBC Category  
Board of Governors has approved 27 percent reservation for Other Backward Classes (OBCs) 
candidates (other than those covered under the category of “creamy layer”) in a phased manner 
commencing from the academic year 2008-09 (ref: BOG 2008.3.16). The reservation is applicable to 
those OBC candidates who satisfy the following eligibility requirements. 
1. They belong to one of the castes listed against the state of their residence on the web-site of National 
Commission of Backward Classes (NCBC), i.e., they belong to the central list of OBC (visit the 
URL: http://ncbc.nic.in/backward-classes/index.html). 
2. They are excluded from the Creamy Layer as provided in the OM No. 36012/22/93-(SCT) dated 8th 
September, 1993 of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievance and Pension, Department of Personnel 
and Training as amended by that department vide OM No. 36033/3/2004-Estt.(Res) dated 9th March, 
2004 and any other notification that may take place before the admission. More details on the definition 
of Creamy Layer are available at the following links:  
http://ncbc.nic.in/html/creamylayer.html     
http://persmin.gov.in/WriteData/WMS/ScanDocument/36033 5 2004 01April2005.htm  
To ensure that the benefit of reservation is given only to the OBCs excluded from the Creamy Layer 
(as per the above-mentioned Office Memorandum), candidates belonging to the OBC category are 
required to produce at the time of admission an original certificate in the prescribed format of 
Government of India, which is amended from time to time. The currently prevailing format is given in 
Annexure II.2. 
DAP Category  
In each category of seats (unreserved and reserved), 5 percent seats are reserved for the Differently 
abled person (DAP) candidates and are to be filled up as per the admission procedure laid down for that 
category. In case one or more of the seats reserved for the DAP candidates in a category remain vacant, 
those are permitted to be filled up by the other candidates belonging to the same category.  
 
 
 
(41) 
ANNEXURE II.1                   
FORM OF CASTE CERTIFICATE FOR SC/ST 
This is  to  certify  that Shri*/Shrimati/Kumari  ______________________________ Son/Daughter  of 
_______________________ 
Village/Town 
 
____________________________.      
/District/Division* 
_____________________  of the  __________________________ State/Union Territory belongs to the 
________________________Caste*/Tribe which is recognized as a Scheduled Caste/Tribe under : 
*The Constitution Scheduled Castes Order, 1950. 
*The Constitution Scheduled Tribes Order, 1950. 
*The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) (Part C States) Order, 1951; 
*The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) (Part C States) Order, 1951; 
[As amended by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes List (Modification Order, 1956, the 
Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960, the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, the State of Himachal Pradesh 
Act, 1970, the North Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976.] 
 
*The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir)* Scheduled Castes Orders, 1956. 
*The Constitution (Andaman and Nicobar Islands)* Scheduled Tribes Order, 1959, as amended by the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 
*The Constitution (Dadra and Nagar Haveli)* Scheduled Castes Order, 1962. 
*The Constitution (Dadra and Nagar Haveli)* Scheduled Tribes Order, 1962.  
*The Constitution (Pondicherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964. 
 
*The Constitution (Uttar Pradesh) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1967. 
*The Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Castes Order, 1968. 
*The Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1968. *The Constitution (Nagaland) 
Scheduled Tribes Order, 1970. 
 
*The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 
*The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978 
 
*The Constitution (Jammu & Kashmir) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1989.  
*The Constitution (SC) Orders (Amendment) Act, 1990. 
*The Constitution (ST) Orders (Amendment) Ordinance Act, 1991. 
 
*The Constitution (ST) Orders (Amendment) Ordinance Act, 1996.  
*The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002. 
*The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Second Amendment) Act, 2002. 
 
*The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002. 
2. Applicable in the case of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes persons who have migrated from one 
State/Union Territory Administration. 
This certificate is issued on the basis of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes Certificate issued to 
Shri/Shrimati* _____________________ father/mother* _______________ of Shri/Shrimati/Kumari 
_______________________ 
of   Village/Town*   _____________________   in   /District/Division* 
____________________ of the  State/Union Territory* _______________________ who belongs to the 
____________________Caste*/Tribe which is recognised as a Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe in the 
Station/Union Territory* issued by the ________________________ dated _________________. 
3. 
Shri/Shrimati/Kumari* and/or* his/her* family ordinarily reside(s) in Village/Town* 
_______________________ 
District/Division* 
of 
the 
State/Union 
Territory* 
of 
______________________. 
Place ________________________              Signature __________________________ 
Date _________________________                Designation__________________________ 
       (with seal of Office) 
State/Union Territory _____________________ 
* Please delete the words, which are not 
applicable.  
@ Please quote specific Presidential Order 
 
(42) 
% Delete the Paragraph, which is not applicable 
Note : (a) The term ‘ordinarily reside’(s) used here will have the same meaning as in Section 20 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
 
The following Officers are authorised to issue caste certificates : 
1. District Magistrate/Additional District Magistrate/Collector/Deputy Commissioner/Additional 
Deputy Commissioner/Deputy Collector/1st Class Stipendary Magistrate/Sub Divisional 
Magistrate/Taluka Magistrate/Executive Magistrate/Extra Assistant Commissioner.  
2. Chief Presidency Magistrate/Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate/Presidency Magistrate.  
3. Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tehsildar.  
4. Sub-Divisional Officer of the area where the candidate and/or his family normally resides.  
 
5. Certificates issued by Gazetted Officers of the Central or of a State Government countersigned 
by the District Magistrate concerned.  
6. Administrator/Secretary to Administrator (Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands).  
(43) 
ANNEXURE II.2                   
   (Format of OBC Certificate) 
 
FORM OF CERTIFICATE TO BE PRODUCED BY OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES (NCL) 
 
This is to certify that Shri/Smt./Kumari _____________________________________son/daughter 
of_____________________________of village/town ____________________________________ in 
District/Division 
_________________________________________________in 
the 
State/Union 
Territory________________________________belongs to the ____________________community 
which is recognised as a backward class under the Government of India, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment’s 
Resolution 
No. 
_____________________________________________ 
dated 
_________________*. Shri/Smt./Kumari __________________________________ and /or his/her 
family ordinarily reside(s) in the _____________________________________________________  
District/Division of the __________________________________________ State/Union Territory. This 
is also to certify that he/she does not belong to the persons/sections (Creamy Layer) mentioned in 
Column 3 of the Schedule to the Government of India, Department of Personnel & Training O.M. No. 
36012/22/93 – Estt.(SCT)  dated 8.9.1993 **. 
 
 
District Magistrate, 
 Deputy Commissioner etc. 
Dated: 
 
 
 
          Seal 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
* The authority issuing the certificate may have to mention the details of Resolution of Government of 
India, in which the caste of the candidate is mentioned as OBC. 
** As amended from time to time. 
 
Note:- The term “Ordinarily” used here will have the same meaning as in Section 20 of the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(44) 
ANNEXURE III  
 
POSTGRADUATE COURSES  
 
Course Number  
Each postgraduate course will have a unique number consisting of two parts. The first part will consist 
of a code to identify the department/programme which will be of 1 to 3 characters of English alphabet 
and identical for all courses of a particular Department/Programme. In the case of Humanities and 
Social Sciences separate identification codes will be used for each of the approved disciplines. The 
second part will be a three-digit number beginning with 6, 7, 8 or 9 unless the course is offered by the 
departments having M.Sc. programmes. For such departments, the second part will be a three-digit 
number beginning with 4 and 5 also.  To ensure active participation of the identified department to run a 
IDP, the nomenclature of the individual courses offered under the programme shall reflect the identity of 
the department offering the course.  
Course Credits 
The credits of postgraduate courses will be arrived at as per the table given below: 
Credits per contact hour in a week  
Lecture:  
 
3 credits 
 Tutorial:  
 
2 credits 
Laboratory:  
 
1 credit 
Discussion hour:  
1 credit 
Approval of a New Course  
All postgraduate courses require the approval of the SPGC before being offered. A course should be 
proposed by an interested faculty member in a prescribed format at least six weeks before the pre-
registration dates of the semester in which it is proposed to be offered for the first time. The Convenor, 
DPGC should e-mail the proposal to all faculty members to elicit their comments and suggestions, and 
should send a hard copy/ soft copy of the proposal to the Chairperson, SPGC. A minimum period of 
three weeks should be allowed for such comments to be received. After this period, the Convenor in 
consultation with the proposer of the course will write to the Chairperson, SPGC for approval with the 
proposal in its final form after taking into account all comments/suggestions and making suitable 
modifications. The comments/suggestions received should be enclosed with the letter to the 
Chairperson, SPGC. If over 20 percent of the contents have been modified, the proposal should be re-
circulated to all faculty members. At least one week should be allowed for the receipt of comments on 
the revised course proposal. 
Discontinuation of Course  
Any postgraduate course, which is not offered for three consecutive years, may be discontinued. The 
Academic Section will inform the department concerned about such course(s) and if a recommendation 
to keep the course in the list of approved courses is not received within one month, the course will be 
taken off from the list of approved courses. No course will be permitted to remain in the list of approved 
courses for over five years without being offered. The Head of the Department or Convener, DPGC can 
(45) 
request in writing to the Chairperson, SPGC to remove a course from the list of approved courses for the 
department.  
Special Topic Course Capsule: 
These courses are temporary 4-week long 3-credit courses consisting of about 12 lectures, and about two 
hours of evaluation. Such courses may be offered by a visiting professor or a special invitee also, with 
the host faculty member becoming the course instructor, but the course lectures cannot be part of a 
workshop/conference etc., or a part of the activities of another organization. These courses will only 
have S/X grades. The credits earned through such courses will not count towards satisfying the 
minimum credit requirements for graduation. The approval of such courses will be proposed by the 
concerned DPGC and approved by SPGC within a week of its circulation for feedback. These courses 
will be announced before the beginning of the semester, clearly indicating the dates of offering the 
course. 
(46) 
ANNEXURE IV  
Credit Requirements for award of M.Tech/M. Des/MSR/MBA degree with PhD degree 
 
S. 
No. 
Dept. 
Departmental guidelines for the award of M.Tech./M.Des./MSR/MBA 
degree to those students who take a direct admission into the Ph.D 
programme after 4-year undergraduate program /M.Sc. 
1 
AE 
Both M. Tech thesis and course options are available to the student 
2 
BSBE 
Both M. Tech thesis and course options are available to the student 
3 
CGS 
Both M. Tech thesis and MSR Thesis options are available to the student 
4 
CHE 
Only M. Tech thesis option is available to the student 
5 
CHM 
Only MSR option is available to the student. Minimum thesis and course credits 
for the degree are 180 and 42, respectively 
6 
CSE 
Both M. Tech thesis and course options are available to the student 
7 
CE 
Both M. Tech thesis and course options are available to the student 
8 
DES 
Both M. Des thesis and course options are available to the student 
9 
DoMS 
Both M. Tech thesis and course as well as MBA options are available to the 
student 
10 
EE 
Only M. Tech thesis option will be available to the student 
11 
MSE 
Only M. Tech thesis option is available to the student 
12 
ME 
Only M. Tech thesis option is available to the student 
13 
MSP 
Only M. Tech thesis option is available to the student 
14 
MTH 
Only MSR option is available to the student. Minimum thesis and course credits 
for the degree are 144 and 72, respectively 
15 
PHY 
Only MSR option is available to the student. Minimum thesis and course credits 
for the degree are 180 and 72, respectively 
16 
PSE 
Only M. Tech. thesis option is available to the student 
17 
SEE 
Only M. Tech. thesis option is available to the student 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(47) 
ANNEXURE V  
 
 
 Guidelines for MBA programme in various PG Manual clause.  
 
1: Conversion from MBA to PhD 
The migration policy in line with existing policy. 
 
Case a: Students with PhD eligibility criteria. 
The student satisfies the eligibility criteria (of PhD) and has completed one/two/three semesters of the 
MBA with a minimum of 27 credits through course work and has a CPI of at least 7.0 (this is in line 
with PG manual for other masters’ program). 
 
Case b: Students without PhD eligibility criteria 
The student does not satisfy the eligibility criteria; however, he/she has completed course requirements 
of the MBA programme with a CPI of at least 7.0. 
 
Additional points: 
1. Two mandatory PhD courses to be completed for both the cases a. and b. 
2. The candidate in case b must complete 216 credits of MBA program. 
3. Regarding entry level criteria--- The migration routes (cases a and b) will satisfy the eligibility for 
PhD for the respective routes (cases a and b). 
 
2. Conversion from PhD to MBA (as an exit option): 
 
As the entry level admission criteria is different for different streams of candidates with different 
background (Commerce, Engineering, CA, Finance, Management), providing MBA as an exit option in 
addition to M. Tech. will be more meaningful. 
 
Suggested guidelines for conversion from PhD to MBA: 
1. 216 credits (including the core MBA courses) are needed to be taken. 
2. Full MBA fee payment irrespective of the time of conversion. 
 
Exit options for a candidate: 
1. Exit degree possibility will be based on meeting the eligibility criteria for that specific exit degree (M. 
Tech. or MBA). 
2. Every case will be evaluated by DPGC for the merit before forwarding it to SPGC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(48) 
ANNEXURE VI 
 
MSPD programme: Change in registration, Academic roadmap 
 
1. 
Change in registration from M.Sc. to MSPD Programme 
 
Students admitted in the M.Sc. programme may apply for MSPD programme subject to fulfilment of 
eligibility criteria as mentioned below and availability of seats in the programme.  
(i) Eligibility: A minimum CPI of 7.0 and no backlogs at the time of applying. 
(ii) Application Process: Students may apply at the end of their third semester (but before the date of 
registration for the fourth semester). Students should include two letters of recommendation with the 
application. At least one of the letters should be from an instructor with whom the student has done a 
course at IIT Kanpur. Applications shall be considered by a selection committee, to be set up by the head of 
the department, and approved by the Chairperson, SPGC. The recommendations of the selection committee 
shall be approved by SPGC. 
2. 
Academic Roadmap 
(A) From the perspective of whether M.Sc. or PhD rules apply, the time spent in completing the MSPD’s 
first 3 years of approved coursework is split into two parts: 
(i) First two years of coursework: During this period, an MSPD student will be governed by the 
rules meant for M.Sc. students. However, the course template will be followed as per 
Departmental MSPD template. 
(ii) Third year of coursework: MSPD students migrate to the PhD part of the programme provided 
they have cleared all the courses of the first four semesters as per MSPD template with at least 6.0 
CPI. Furthermore, 
(i) Till a student migrates to PhD part, they will be governed by M.Sc. rules (except for the course 
template). After migration, the student will be governed by the rules meant for the PhD students 
(except for the course template).  
(ii) When a student migrates late (after fifth or later semester), then the already done third-year-
courses in the template should be counted towards their PhD coursework.  
(B) If a student completes the 3-year coursework but is still unable to migrate (CPI less than 6.0), then the 
student is allowed to either (a) exit the programme with an M.Sc. degree or (b) continue doing extra 
elective courses to improve the CPI to 6.0. The maximum duration in such cases is (1.5 times of 
normal duration) 9 semesters. 
 
(C) MSPD students will get an M.Sc. degree after successful completion of the full three-year-course-
template of MSPD program. 
 
3. 
 Summer Term 
 
Until MSPD students migrate to the PhD part of the programme, they are expected to spend a minimum 
period of 8 weeks during every summer term doing a project on campus with a faculty member. A co-
supervisor from within IITK or outside IITK is allowed. However, if they spend time outside IITK for the 
project, they will not get funding from two sources. A student who does not do such a project is not eligible 
to receive any assistantship during the summer term. 
 
 
 
 
 
(49) 
ANNEXURE VII 
 
Course Template for MSc and MSPD Programme 
 
 
Department of Chemistry 
 
Course Template for MSc (2-Year)  
 
Sem I 
Sem II 
Sem III 
Sem IV 
CHM401 [9] 
CHM402 [9] 
CHM611 [9] 
CHM700 [27] 
CHM321 [9] 
CHM322 [9] 
CHM621 [9] 
DE-3 [9] 
CHM345 [9] 
CHM342 [9] 
CHM631 [9] 
DE-4 [9] 
CHM503 [6] 
CHM443 [6] 
CHM699 [18] /  2 x DE [9] 
OE-2 [9] 
CHM423 [6] 
DE-1 [9] 
DE-2 [9] 
 
CHM521 [6] 
OE-1 [9] 
 
 
CHM361 [6] 
 
 
 
Credits: 51 
Credits: 51 
Credits: 54 
Credits: 54 
  
     Credits Distribution   
Course type  
Credit requirements  
Department Compulsory (DC)  
138  
Department Elective (DE)  
54  
Open Elective (OE)  
18  
Total Credits  
210  
  
Course Mapping for equivalent courses in Old ARC and New ARC  
  
S. No. 
Course number in the old M.Sc. template 
Course number in the new M.Sc. template 
1 
CHM421 
CHM321 
2 
CHM441 
CHM345 
3 
CHM422 
CHM322 
4 
CHM442 
CHM342 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(50) 
Department of Economic Sciences 
 
Course template for MSc (2-Year) 
Sem I 
Sem II 
Sem III 
Sem IV 
HSO201 [11] 
ECO713 [9] 
ECO351 [9] 
OE-2 [9] 
ECO701 [9] 
ECO714 [9] 
OE-1 [9] 
ОE-3/DE-4 [9] 
ECO612 [9] 
ECO611 [6] 
DE-1 [9] 
DE-5 [9] 
ECO671 [9] 
ECO613 [6] 
DE-2 [9] 
DE-6 [9] 
ECO888 [3] 
ECO702 [9] 
DE-3/Project1 [9] 
DE -7/Project1 [9] 
 
ECO251 [9] 
 
 
Credits: 41 
Credits: 48 
Credits: 45 
Credits: 45 
 
 1The option to write an MS Project be provided to students who maintain CPI levels above a certain 
threshold until the end of the second semester. The M.S. Project will span over two semesters (3rd 
and 4th) and will be counted as one Departmental Elective (DE) course in each semester. A student 
will not be allowed to take the Project credit for one semester only, neither can s/he take two Project 
credits in the 4th semester.  
Credits Distribution 
Course type 
Credit requirements 
Department Compulsory (DC) 
98 
Department Elective (DE) 
63 
Open Elective (OE) 
18 
Total Credits 
179 
 
Department of Physics 
 
Course Template for MSc (2-Year)   
Year 1 
Year 2 
Sem I 
Sem II 
Sem III 
Sem IV 
PHY401 [11] 
PHY412 [11] 
PHY623 [11] 
PHY611 [11] 
PHY421 [11] 
PHY552 [11] 
PHY563 [9] 
PHY566 [9] 
PHY431 [11] 
PHY626 [11] 
PHY565 [9] / DE-1 [09/11] 
PHY568 [9] / DE-2 [09/11] 
PHY441 [11] 
PHY462 [08] 
OE-1 [09/11] 
OE-2 [09/11] 
PHY461 [08] 
PHY617 [12] 
PHY612 [11] 
DE-3 [09/11] 
PHY888 [3] 
 
 
Credits: 52 
Credits: 56 
Credits: 47-53 
Credits: 47-53 
  Note: Only 400/500/600 or above level DE/OE can be taken 
 
(51) 
Credits Distribution  
 
Course type 
Credit requirements 
Department Compulsory (DC) 
158 
Department Elective (DE) 
27-33 
Open Elective (OE) 
18 - 22 
Total Credits 
203 - 213 
  
 Course template for MSPD Programme  
  
Year 1 
Year 2 
Year 3 
Sem I 
Sem II 
Sem III 
Sem IV 
Sem V 
Sem VI 
PHY401 [11] 
PHY412 [11] 
OE-1 [9/11] 
PHY502 [9] 
PHY696 [9] 
PHY697 [9] 
PHY421 [11] 
PHY552 [11] 
PHY462 [8] 
OE-2 [9/11] 
PHY698 [9] 
PHY699 [9] 
PHY431 [11] 
PHY626 [11] 
PHY501 [9] 
PHY611 [11] 
PG-OE-1 [9/11] 
PG-OE-2 [9/11] 
PHY441 [11] 
PHY461 [08] 
PHY623 [11] 
DE-1 [09/11] 
PG-DE-1 [9/11] 
PG-DE-2 [9/11] 
PHY888 [3] 
PHY617 [12] 
PHY612 [11] 
PHY625 [11] or    
PHY692 [12] 
 
 
Credits: 47 
Credits: 53 
Credits: 53-55 
Credits: 49-54 
Credits: 36-40 
Credits: 36-40 
  
Note: Only 600 or above level DE/OE can be taken after migration to the PhD part of the program. Before that 
only 400 or above level DE/OE can be taken.    
 
Department of Mathematics and Statistics 
 
Course Template for MSc (2-Year) in Mathematics 
 
Sem I 
Sem II 
Sem III 
Sem IV 
MTH201 [11] 
MTH204 [11] 
MTH403 [11] 
OE-2 [9] 
MTH202 [11] 
MTH424 [11] 
DE-1 [9] 
OE-3 [9] 
MTH301 [11] 
MTH308 [10] 
OE-1 [9] 
OE-4 [9] 
MTH409 [9] 
MTH305 [11] 
DE-2 [9] 
DE-4 [9] 
MTH421 [11] 
MTH304 [11] 
MTH598 [9] / DE-3 [9] 
MTH599 [9] / DE-5 [9] 
ELC114 [9]* 
 
 
 
Credits: 62 
Credits: 54 
Credits: 47 
Credits: 45 
  
 
(52) 
Credits Distribution in Mathematics  
  
Course type  
Credit requirements  
Department Compulsory (DC)  
118  
Department Elective (DE)  
45  
English language Course (ELC)  
9  
Open Elective (OE)  
36  
Total Credits  
208  
 
Course Template for MSc (2-Year) in Statistics  
  
Sem I 
Sem II 
Sem III 
Sem IV 
MSO205 [11] 
MTH309 [11] 
MTH441 [10] 
MTH314 [10] 
MTH432 [6] 
MTH212 [6] 
MTH515 [11] 
MTH312 [5] 
MTH434 [6] 
MTH313 [6] 
MTH516 [11] 
DE-2 [9] 
MTH433 [11] 
MTH418 [11] 
MTH598 [9] / DE-1[9] 
DE-3 [9] 
MTH208 [5] 
MTH210 [10] 
OE-1 [9] 
MTH599 [9] / DE-4 [9] 
MTH206 [6] 
MTH209 [5] 
 
OE-2 [9] 
MTH207 [6] 
 
 
 
ELC114 [9]* 
 
 
 
Credits: 60 
Credits: 49 
Credits: 50 
Credits: 51 
  
Credits Distribution in Statistics 
  
Course type  
Credit requirements  
Department Compulsory (DC)  
147  
Department Elective (DE)  
36  
English language Course (ELC)  
9  
Open Elective (OE)  
18  
Total Credits  
210  
 
*ELC114 is equivalent to ELC112   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(53) 
ANNEXURE VIII 
Doctoral Monitoring Committee Report 
Name of the Student 
Roll No: 
Department: 
Thesis Supervisor(s): 
Members of the Committee: 
1.        (faculty 1) 
2.        (faculty 2) 
3.        (supervisor(s)) 
 
Date of the Meeting: 
 
Present status of the thesis:  
(max 500 words) 
 
Report the progress made as per the Thesis Work Plan (TWP): 
(max 500 words) 
 
Modification suggested for the TWP: 
(max 500 words) 
 
DMC’s opinion on the work done since the last DMC meeting: 
(max 500 words) 
 
Bottlenecks and difficulties which need attention: 
(max 500 words) 
 
OS9S* recommendations:    
(max 500 words) 
 
Notes:  
1. ‘Thesis Work Plan’ (TWP) has to be submitted to the DMC by the student within four months of 
finishing SOTA. 
2. It is desirable that the members of DMC are provided with a summary along with a pre-recorded 
video/voice-over presentation prior to the meeting.  
3. *OS9S=Open Seminar by 9th Semester; While evaluating the progress, comment on whether the 
student could give an Open Seminar by the 9th Semester. If the student is beyond nine semesters but 
could not give the Open Seminar, mention the hurdles faced by the student and suggest corrective 
measures 
4. A DMC report submission is required for the students who are on academic leave. 
